Bound for Rome: Acts 21-28 
Script References
Introduction  
Tim: We’ve been exploring the book of Acts, which was written by a man 
named Luke as a continuation of the Gospel of Luke. Acts began with 
Jesus telling his followers to spread the good news about his Kingdom.
Jon: And they would start in Jerusalem, then go out into the neighboring 
regions, and from there, to the ends of the earth. 1
Tim: Now in Jerusalem, their message was received by many and opposed by 
many, especially by the leaders of the temple. They were scandalized by 
this new claim that the whole story of Israel had been fulfilled by Jesus’ 
life, death, and resurrection. 
Jon: One of these leaders was a man named Saul of Tarsus, who worked 
tirelessly to stop the movement, that is, until he met the risen Jesus 
himself. And this encounter transformed Saul from an enemy of Jesus into 
a herald of his Kingdom. 2
Tim: And so for years he traveled about the Roman Empire using his Roman 
name, Paul, starting Jesus communities all over. 
Jon: And one of Paul’s greatest desires was that all of these diverse 
communities would see themselves as one unified people regardless of 
their differences—Jew or non-Jew, male or female, slave or free.
Tim: Jesus was creating one unified family of equals living together under his 
rule.
Paul’s Journey to Jerusalem  
Jon: And this brings us to the final section of Acts. Back in Jerusalem, where 
the movement began, the Jewish followers of Jesus were suffering from a 
drought and food shortage. 00:00–01:13
1. Acts 1:8
2. Acts 9
01:14–03:09Tim: And Paul was so passionate about the Church’s unity that he began 
a major fundraising project among the diverse churches he had 
started. They would pool their money together so he and a group of 
representatives could take it as a relief gift to Jerusalem. 
Jon: But it’s not safe for Paul in Jerusalem. The Jewish leaders there dislike him 
so much they want him dead. 
Tim: And Paul knew he was walking into a trap. His friends all begged him not 
to go, but no one could stop him. 3
Jon: Yeah. Why would Paul risk his life to bring this gift? Couldn’t he have sent 
someone else?
Tim: Well, for Paul this was personal. Jerusalem was where he used to 
participate in the murder of Jesus’ followers, and now he gets to serve 
them. It’s also where Jesus himself was executed, and so for Paul it would 
be an honor to suffer there alongside his King. 
Jon: Paul goes to Jerusalem, and as expected, he’s found by his enemies. A 
mob forms and they try to kill him, but Roman soldiers save his life by 
taking him into custody. 4
Tim: The Jewish leaders are accusing Paul of starting a revolt against Rome, but 
they can’t prove it.  
Jon: And the Romans don’t know what to do with him.
Tim: Yeah. They can see Paul’s not a criminal. But his claim that a crucified 
Jewish man is the risen King of the world, it keeps getting him into trouble.
Jon: And so Paul gets transferred from one court to another until he demands 
that his case be tried before the court of Caesar in Rome, and so they 
happily ship him off. 
Tim: Now, throughout this section of Acts, Luke, the writer of this story, has 
portrayed Paul’s trials and imprisonments so that they resemble his 
previous stories of Jesus’ trials and imprisonment. Luke’s making an 
important point. When the people of Jesus follow the way of Jesus, their 
stories will begin to look like his story. Which is beautiful, but it also comes 
with a cost.
Paul Journeys to Rome  
Jon: On the way to Rome, the boat carrying Paul is hit by a violent storm. And 
everyone freaks out. 5
Tim Except for Paul. He’s below deck hosting a meal, just like Jesus did the 
night before his trial. Paul blesses and then breaks the bread, promising 
that God is with them through this storm. And the next day, the ship hits 
and then breaks apart on the rocks, but everyone’s washed safely ashore. 3. Acts 21:14
4. Acts 21:27-26
03:10–03:53
5. Acts 27:13-44Jon: Which is amazing! But Paul’s not out of trouble. He’s taken to Rome and 
put under house arrest. 
Tim: But it’s not so bad. In his house, he can host groups of Jews and non-Jews, 
sharing with them the good news about Jesus the risen King.
Jon: This is a bold move in Rome, the center of power where Caesar rules the 
world as king.
An Unfinished Story  
Tim: Yes. You have Jesus’ alternative, upside-down Kingdom now growing 
in the very heart of the world’s most powerful empire, all through the 
suffering of a prisoner. And with this contrast between kingdoms, Luke 
ends his story. 
Jon: That’s a great image. But the story is supposed to be about this message 
spreading to the ends of the earth. So shouldn’t it continue?
Tim: Of course! Luke has left the story open-ended on purpose so that his 
readers would know that the story isn’t over and that they can participate 
in Jesus’ Kingdom that is still spreading to this day.03:54–04:32