The Apostle Paul: Acts 8–12
Script References
The Jesus Movement 
Jon: During the first century, when the Romans ruled the known world, a 
grassroots countercultural movement was born in the eastern end of the 
empire.
Tim: Yeah. It started among the Jewish people.
Jon: Who for centuries now have been scattered around the known world.
Tim:  But no matter where they lived, or what language they spoke, they kept 
their identity as the family of Abraham1  devoted to the one true God.
Jon: Every year, they would travel to Jerusalem for sacred festivals. And during 
one of these, the feast of Pentecost, the visitors encountered a group of 
Jews who could somehow speak in everyone’s native dialect.2
Tim: Yeah. They were telling stories about a man named Jesus who had been 
executed by the Romans. They claimed he had risen from the dead and 
was now exalted as the true King of Israel and the whole world! And this 
Jesus was now calling people to adopt his upside-down set of values and 
live under his rule, called the Kingdom of God.
Jon: And thousands of Jews decided to stay in Jerusalem and join the 
movement. It grew in size and in influence, and gained favor with people.
Tim: But not with the Jerusalem temple leaders. They viewed this whole thing 
as a dangerous religious sect, and they even executed one of its leaders 
named Stephen.3
Jon: It’s no longer safe in Jerusalem, so most of the followers flee for the 
outlying land called Judea.4
Tim: And you might think that’s the end of the story. But actually, this tragedy 
became the way the movement spread outside Jerusalem. And that’s 
where the second part of the book of Acts begins. 00:00–01:29
1. Genesis 12
2. Acts 2
3. Acts 7
4. Acts 8:4The Ends of the Earth 
Jon The scattered followers end up in surprising places, like Samaria, where 
their ancient enemies live.
Tim: Yeah, and Luke shows us how all these unexpected people start following 
Jesus. Like a sorcerer from Samaria who has to learn that the way of Jesus 
isn’t about gaining power but giving it up to serve others. 
Jon: There’s also that story about an Ethiopian delegate who, after discussing 
the scroll of the prophet Isaiah with Phillip, decides to join the movement.5  
Tim: Yeah. Jesus is expanding his movement out into Judea and Samaria, just 
like he said he would.
Jon: Which is great!
The Transformation of Saul 
Tim: But back in Jerusalem, we meet Saul of Tarsus. He’s part of the religious 
elite who oppose the new movement, and he’s finding and arresting Jesus’ 
followers anywhere he can.6
Jon: This is a cruel guy.
Tim: But think about it from his perspective. In the past, Israel had turned away 
to other gods and to false prophets, leading to disaster. He believed he 
was protecting Israel and God’s honor by getting rid of these people. 
Jon: And then Saul hears that the movement spread north to Damascus. So he 
sets out there to find and arrest more followers.
Tim: And on the way, Saul has this sudden encounter with the risen Jesus 
himself. Jesus asks Saul why he’s fighting against him. And then Jesus 
commissions Saul to now represent him to Israel and to the nations.7
Jon: And Saul is stunned and speechless.
Tim: And so he ends up in Damascus, but now he’s announcing the good news 
about the Jesus he had just been attacking. 
Jon: Yeah. No one saw this coming.
The Roman Centurion 
Tim: Totally, and the same goes for what happened next. Over in the port city 
of Caesarea, there was a Roman centurion named Cornelius. And he 
represents everything the Jewish people would hate about the Roman 
occupation. 
Jon: An angel appears to him, and he tells him to call for a man named Peter.8  
So Peter comes and he finds Cornelius and his friends and his family all 
gathered together in his home.901:30–02:01
5. Acts 8:26-40
02:02–02:56
6. Acts 9
7. Acts 9:3-6
02:57–04:16
8. Acts 10:1-8
9. Acts 10:23-25Tim: Yeah, and this is scandalous. Jewish people don’t enter a non-Jewish home 
to avoid ritual impurity. 
Jon: So what’s Peter going to do?
Tim: Well, right before this Peter had a vision. God brought to him a collection 
of animals that his people were forbidden to eat, and then God said to 
Peter, “Eat these.”10
Jon: And this is shocking to Peter. He says, “I’ve never eaten anything impure.” 
Tim: And God responds, “Don’t call impure, what I have made pure.” And then 
that’s it. The vision was over.
Jon: So Peter is going to start a new diet?
Tim: No! He’s an Israelite. And he’s honored these customary food laws his 
entire life. The vision was preparing him for this moment of him standing 
among “impure” non-Israelites. And he realizes that God is declaring these 
people are a part of the family of Abraham. 
Jon: And so Peter decides to stay and tell them about Jesus.11
Tim: And the Holy Spirit shows up just as he did at Pentecost. But now it’s for a 
Roman centurion and his non-Jewish family!
Jon: The movement is broken out.
The Church in Antioch  
Tim: And so back in Jerusalem, Peter is now telling the other apostles about 
what happened. And they start getting reports about even more non-
jewish people following Jesus up in the big trade city up north called 
Antioch. So they send a man there named Barnabas to check things out.12
Jon: Barnabas finds the Jesus movement alive and well in Antioch, and he finds 
it’s made up of people from all over the world! 
Tim: And so Barnabas recruits Saul to come and work with him in Antioch for 
a year. They’re teaching, living among the people there, watching the 
movement grow. 
Jon: The church in Antioch was the first international Jesus community. And it 
is where Jesus’ followers were first called “Christians,” the Christ-ones.13
Tim: And so the way of Jesus was transformed from a group of messianic Jews 
in Jerusalem into the multiethnic Jesus movement spreading through the 
world. Their faith was the same—it was centered on the good news about 
the crucified Jesus who is the King of all nations. 
Jon: But that message and their new way of life was confusing, even 
threatening, to the average Roman citizens living around them.
Tim: And the resulting conflict is what we’ll explore next as this movement goes 
global, or as Jesus said, “to the ends of the earth.”10. Acts 10:13-15
11. Acts 10:34-48
04:17–05:28
12. Acts 11:19-30
13. Acts 11:26