Shema: Love 
Script References
Introduction  
For thousands of years, every morning and evening Jewish people have prayed 
these well-known words as a way of expressing their devotion to God, they’re 
called the Shema. 
“Hear O Israel, the LORD is our God, the Lord is one, and as for you, you shall 
love the LORD your God with all of your heart, with all your soul, and with all 
your strength.”1
We’re going to look at the third key word in this prayer: Israel is called to “love” 
their God. But what does that mean?
Ahavah  
“Love” is a very common word in most languages, as it is in ancient Hebrew 
(pronounced ahavah), and it most basically refers to the affection or care one 
person shows another. It sometimes describes physical affection, like the 
king of Persia’s “love” for Queen Esther2  but there are other Hebrew words 
that more specifically refer to physical desire or sex (the words for that are 
dodim or ‘agab). Ahavah is more broad. So Abraham had ahavah for his son 
Isaac3 —that’s parental love.4  Jonathan showed ahavah for his friend David, that 
would be brotherly love.5  In fact, a whole group of people can have ahavah for 
their leader, like when the Israelites showed love for their king, David.6  Ahavah  
can even describe loyalty between political allies, like Hiram, the king of Tyre 
“loved” David, they had good relations, and so Hiram wanted to help David’s 
son Solomon build the temple.7  
These are all different kinds of affection, described with the one word ahavah. 
Now all of this is helpful for understanding God’s ahavah in the Old Testament. 00:00–00:28
1. Deuteronomy 6:4-5
00:29–01:27
2. Esther 2:17
3. Genesis 22:2
4. 2 Samuel 19:6
5. 1 Samuel 18:1
6. 1 Samuel 18:16
7. 1 Kings 5:1God’s Ahavah
So in Deuteronomy, Moses told the Israelites: “God showed affection for you, 
He chose you … because of his ahavah for you.”8  So God doesn’t love them 
because they earned it or deserve it, it simply originates from God’s own 
character. He loves because he loves. This is why Jeremiah can say that God’s 
love is “everlasting.”9  It has no end, because it has no beginning. God’s love just 
is, an eternal fact of the universe. 
And God’s love is not a duty, it is a genuine feeling, an affection that God 
experiences. This is why the prophet Hosea compares God’s love for his people 
to a husband’s ahavah for his wife,10 or to a parent showing ahavah for their 
child.11 It’s one of the strongest things God feels.
But that doesn’t mean that God’s love is just a feeling: God’s love is also an 
action—it’s something God chooses to do. Like when Moses says, “because of 
his ahavah for your ancestors, he brought you out of Egypt with great power.”12 
God’s love isn’t just a sentiment, it is something God does.
Ahavah is an Action 
And so, in the Shema Israel is called to respond to God’s ahavah by showing 
ahavah in return (“you shall love the LORD your God with all your heart”). And 
just like God’s love, human love should show itself through actions. Like in 
Deuteronomy 10:12-13, “What does the LORD your God ask of you, except to 
fear the Lord your God, to walk in his ways, to love him and serve him … and to 
keep his commands.” All of these actions are centered around love. If I’m not 
doing them, I don’t actually love God. I just say I do.
Which leads to one last thing, in the Old Testament, I show my love for God by 
how I treat the people around me. In Deuteronomy 10:18-19, we read that “God 
defends the cause of the fatherless and the widow, and he shows ahavah for 
the immigrants among you, giving them food and clothing. And so you also 
show ahavah for the immigrant.” 
So the people are to imitate God’s ahavah, by showing ahavah for others. 
This is the idea underneath the famous line: “you shall love  your neighbor as 
yourself.”13 
And so at the end of the day, all of this is rooted in God’s own eternal ahavah. 
Like we read in the New Testament letter of 1 John 4:19, “We love, because God 
first loved us.” 
And that’s the Hebrew word ahavah.01:28–02:30
8. Deuteronomy 7:7-8
9. Jeremiah 31:3
10.  Hosea 3:1
11.  Hosea 11:1
12.  Deuteronomy 4:37
02:31–03:47
13.  Leviticus 19:18