Angel of the Lord
Script References
Introduction and Historical Baggage  
Tim: So in the Bible, reality is made up of two overlapping realms, the Heavens 
and the Earth, our space and God’s space.
Jon: And while life here on Earth may seem ordinary, sometimes we can 
encounter Heaven right here in our own realm. 
Tim: Yes! This happens a number of times in the Bible. And when it does, we 
often encounter a fascinating character, the Angel of Yahweh, or in most 
translations of the Bible, the Angel of the Lord.
Jon: Now, we’ve talked about angels. They’re spiritual messengers who perform 
missions for God.
Tim: But the Angel of the Lord is no mere angel.
Jon: How so?
Tim: Well, every time he appears, he’s described in a way that’s purposefully 
puzzling. And it leaves you wondering: was that an angel sent by Yahweh, 
or was that Yahweh himself?  
Yahweh Made Visible  
Jon: What do you mean? 
Tim: Here’s one of many examples. In the book of Genesis, there’s a story about 
Hagar, Abraham and Sara’s runaway Egyptian slave, and we read this:
Jon: “The angel of Yahweh called to Hagar.” 1
Tim: But then this angel speaks as if he is Yahweh, saying, “ I will give you many 
descendants.” And then Hagar responds and says, “ You are God who sees 
me!”
Jon: So the Angel of Yahweh is Yahweh. But that can’t be. In the Bible, you can’t 
see Yahweh or you’ll die. 00:00–00:43
00:44–02:29
1. Genesis 16:7-13Tim: Yeah, so this story and others like it are inviting us into a paradox—that 
Yahweh is, above all, inaccessible to us, but sometimes he reveals himself 
to us in ways that we can see and understand. And that’s where this 
character shows up. 
Jon: He is Yahweh made visible to us. 
Tim: Yes—distinct from Yahweh and also Yahweh. This is very similar to other 
biblical stories about prophets who get a glimpse into God’s space, like 
Isaiah, Ezekiel, or Daniel. And what they see is a glorious human figure on 
a throne who’s called Yahweh. 2
Jon: So the one on the throne and the Angel of Yahweh, this is the same 
person?
Tim: Exactly. Watch all this all come together in the famous story of Moses and 
the burning bush, where we read: 
Jon: “The Angel of Yahweh appeared to Moses in a blazing fire from the midst 
of a bush ... And when Yahweh saw that Moses stopped to look, God 
called to him from the midst of the bush.” 3
Tim: So this person in the bush is called the Angel of Yahweh, then Yahweh, 
and then God. And then later in the story, Moses learns that the figure in 
the burning bush is the one leading Israel out of Egypt in a pillar of fire and 
cloud. And that’s the one who later takes up residence in the tabernacle! 4
Jon: The tabernacle—this is the throne room of God himself. 
Tim: You got it. The Angel of the Lord is the royal glory of Yahweh appearing as 
a human.
God Becomes Human in Jesus   
Tim: Now, keep all that in mind as we start talking about Jesus. In the opening 
of the Gospel of John, we’re told that from all eternity Jesus was with God 
and was God.
Jon: Distinct from God and also God. That’s the same paradox we saw with the 
Angel of Yahweh.
Tim: Right. And then John says that God’s word “became human and set up a 
tabernacle among us.” 5
Jon: The temple presence of the invisible God.
Tim: Exactly. Now check this out. There’s a story about when Jesus took three of 
his followers up to a mountain and his true identity was revealed. He was 
transformed into a glorious human figure. 6 
Jon: Okay. I see what’s going on. So the Angel of the Lord was God appearing 
like a human. And Jesus is God now become  a human. 2. Isaiah 6:1-4; 
 Ezekiel 1:26-28; 
 Daniel 7:13-14
3. Exodus 3:2-4
4. Exodus 13:20-21,  
 14:19-20, 16:9-10,  
 19:18-20, 23:20-21
02:30–03:41
5. John 1:1-3, 14
6. Matthew 17Tim: Yes, and notice this. In the New Testament, no one ever uses the phrase 
“Angel of the Lord” to describe Jesus. 
Jon: Why not?
Tim: Well, they wanted to avoid the idea that Jesus was merely an angel. 
For them, Jesus was Yahweh God become human, in order to fulfill his 
ultimate mission to fully reunite Heaven and Earth once and for all.
Credits  
Jon: You just watched a video on the Angel of the Lord.
Tim: Next up, we’re gonna look at the Satan and demons, the spiritual beings 
who resist God’s plan to reunite Heaven and Earth.03:56–04:14