Iniquity 
Script References
Introduction  
Most people assume the Bible has a lot to say about how messed up humans  
are, and that’s true. It’s also true that the Bible’s vocabulary about this topic  
sounds odd to modern people, using words like sin, iniquity, or  
transgression. And so the Bible’s perspective on the human condition is  
often ignored or treated as ancient and backwards. 
This is really unfortunate because through these words, the biblical authors 
are offering us a deeply profound diagnosis of human nature. Sin refers to 
moral failure, and transgression describes how we break trust with others. And 
iniquity? No one even uses that word anymore. So what’s it all about? 
The Hebrew Word Avon  
In Bible translations, iniquity is one way the Hebrew word avon  gets  
translated. It’s also rendered with words like wickedness, guilt, or sin. So  
what does avon  actually mean?
The word avon  is related to a Hebrew verb avah , which means “to be bent”  
or “crooked.” The poet of Psalm 36 says his back is avah ’d, that is, “bent over” 
in pain.1   Or in Lamentations chapter 3, a road that isn’t straight is one  
that avah ’s, that is, it’s twisty and crooked.2  
Now this image of being crooked offered biblical poets a powerful metaphor  
to talk about people’s behavior, like Jeremiah, who said Israel has “avah ’d  
their way” by violating their covenant with God and giving allegiance to  
idols.3   Or in the book of Job, a person who morally fails is someone who  
avah ’s what is right.4   In both cases, something that’s supposed to be level or  
even, your choices or your conscience, has been bent out of shape,  
distorted. 
In the Bible, avon  refers to all kinds of crooked behavior—ten commandments 
kind of stuff, lying, murder, adultery. In Isaiah chapter 59, avon  describes the 
corruption among Israel’s leaders who were ignoring the injustice done to the 
poor. The prophet cleverly adapts the metaphor, saying, “We have so much 00:00–00:40
00:41–03:52
1. Psalm 38:6
2. Lamentations 3:9
3. Jeremiah 3:21
4. Job 33:27avon ,” that is, crookedness, “that uprightness can’t even enter our city.” Things 
were so morally distorted in Jerusalem that crooked was the new straight. 
Another fascinating thing about the word avon  is that it refers not only to  
distorted behavior but also to the crooked consequences—the hurt people,  
the broken relationships, the cycles of retaliation. You find this idea in the  
biblical phrase “to punish,” which in biblical Hebrew is to “visit someone’s 
avon  upon them,” that is, to let them sit in the consequences of their crooked 
choices. This is what the prophet Jeremiah said about Babylonians who 
were destroying other nations.5   One day those nations would destroy them 
in return. And so Babylon’s divine punishment would be having to live in a 
disfigured world of its own making. 
This is actually the main way biblical authors talk about God’s response to  
human avon —letting people experience the crooked consequences of their  
choices. This is the meaning of the common biblical phrase “to bear your  
iniquity,” or in Hebrew, “to carry your avon .” God gives people the dignity of  
carrying the consequences of their bad decisions. 
But that’s not the only way God responds to avon  in the Bible. He also offers  
to carry the avon  of corrupt people as an act of sheer generosity. In fact,  
“carrying avon ” is the most common Hebrew phrase for God’s forgiveness, like 
Psalm 32 where the poet says, “I did not hide my avon , but confessed it… and 
you carried the avon  of my sin.”6   This is actually shocking if you stop and think 
about it. God forgives people by taking responsibility for their avon .
This idea reaches its high point in the book of Isaiah, where God appoints a 
figure called “the servant.” He will embody God’s forgiving love by “carrying the 
avon  of many” and allowing it to crush him. This servant will absorb humanity’s 
crookedness, letting it overwhelm and destroy him. But that’s not the end of 
the story. The servant will emerge out the other side of death, alive and well, so 
he can offer his life to others.7  
The Greek Word Anomia 
When you get to the New Testament, the apostles carry these ideas forward, 
using the Greek word anomia, which has a similar meaning. Like Paul the 
apostle, he identifies the servant as Jesus, and he said, “Our great God and 
savior, Jesus the Messiah, gave his life on our behalf, in order to redeem us 
from all of our anomia,” 8 our crooked behavior and its consequences.
Conclusion 
And so the whole biblical story is about God’s desire to take crooked people  
and the twisted world that we’ve created and to make everything right.  
Through Jesus, God invites us to become whole humans once again, people  
who can walk upright with God and with each other. 
And that’s the story behind the biblical words for iniquity. 5. Jeremiah 25:12
6. Psalm 32:5
7. Isaiah 53:11-12
03:53–04:16
8. Titus 2:14
04:17–04:41