Reading Biblical Law 
Script References
Introduction  
Tim: If you start reading the Bible from the beginning, you’ll get about halfway 
through the second book, Exodus, and you’ll come to a bunch of ancient 
laws.
Jon: “Thou shalt do this.” “Thou shalt not do that.” 
Tim: Now these laws are all written in the literary style we call prose discourse, 
and they’re found all over the second, third, fourth, and fifth books of the 
Bible. There’s over 600 laws. 
Jon: And since reading ancient law code isn’t something you and your friends 
do a lot, odds are you’re going to struggle. So let’s talk about how to read 
the law in the Bible.
God’s First Command 
Tim: So the first thing to remember is that the Bible is not a behavior manual 
with a complete list of what to do and not to do to make God happy. 
Jon: Right. The Bible is an epic narrative. But in the story, God does tell people 
what to do.
Tim: For sure. The story begins with God’s plan to rule the world through 
humans who will trust him and live by his wisdom. And here we find the 
first divine command in the Bible. 
Jon: “Don’t eat from the tree of knowing good and evil because the day you do, 
you’ll die.”1  
Tim: But the humans take the authority to know and define good and evil for 
themselves, and it’s not good. It leads to a world of violence and death, 
and they are exiled from the garden.
Jon: Okay, so this was the first law in the Bible? 
Tim: Well, it’s the first divine command, and it invites the people to trust God 
and live by his wisdom. And so while it’s not part of the laws given to 
Israel, it does foreshadow them because those too are invitations to trust 
God’s wisdom. 00:00–00:30
00:31–01:28
1. Genesis 3:3Jon: So when do the laws of Israel come? 
The Laws of Israel  
Tim: Okay. Here’s the story. Israel is enslaved in Egypt, so God saves them and 
then invites them into a covenant relationship, like a marriage. And the 
laws make up the terms of that covenant. 
Jon: And so do we get a catalog of all these laws that God gave Israel?
Tim: Actually no. We don’t get all of the laws, only examples. And these have 
been strategically placed in between stories about how Israel keeps 
violating the laws. 
Jon: Ah. So I’m supposed to see that Israel is no different than the humans in 
the garden? They don’t trust God or live by his wisdom. 
Tim: Right, and so it leads to another round of tragedy, violence, and death. 
Jon: And it ends in exile!
Tim: And so while the laws are good and show God’s wisdom, they also expose 
Israel’s inability to be God’s faithful partners.
Types of Laws  
Jon: I’m following. But when I read the laws, I find a lot of strange stuff, like not 
allowing clothing to be made of two different fabrics. Like how does that 
show God’s wisdom?
Tim: Okay, so it’s important to realize that many of these laws are ancient ritual 
symbols that set Israel apart, that is, made them holy. So some laws made 
Israel distinct from neighboring nations, while other laws kept them away 
from things that, in their culture, symbolized death, disease, and moral 
corruption. 
Jon: Okay, but what about all of the ritual killing of animals?
Tim: Sacrifices were also ritual symbols that connected people to God. Since 
you a mortal can’t ascend up to God’s presence in the heavenly temple, a 
blameless animal that was offered could go up in your place, covering for 
your failures, so you can know you’re accepted by God.
Jon: I see. But not all the laws are ancient rituals. Some of them are just about 
being a good person and treating others well.
Tim: Well yes, but these laws aren’t just about being good. They’re about 
justice, which is a big deal to God. On the first page of the Bible, we learn 
that every human is made in God’s image and is worthy of dignity. And 
these laws applied that ideal in Israel’s day. In fact, these laws still underlie 
many of the concepts of justice and equality that we take for granted 
today.01:29–02:13
02:14–05:07Jon: But some of the laws don’t seem just, like laws that allow for slavery.
Tim: Well if you look at those laws in their ancient cultural context, you’ll see 
that God’s working with Israel as he finds them, pushing them towards 
justice. So slavery isn’t abolished, but it is undermined. For example, Israel 
was supposed to reenact the Exodus liberation by releasing slaves and 
forgiving all debts every seven years. This was revolutionary in the ancient 
world. 
Jon: Alright. Now what about all the laws about Sabbath rest on the seventh 
day and all the seven-day feasts? I mean, what’s up with all these sevens?
Tim: Yeah, so these laws about sacred time are all connected to the first 
creation narrative in Genesis. God brings order out of chaos in six days 
that each have a clear beginning and end. But when you get to the 
seventh day, it has no end. That’s because it’s pointing to the ideal of 
humans partnering with God in his rule and rest. All of these seven-day 
feasts are rituals that symbolize humanity’s true purpose and future hope. 
Jon: Okay, so all of these laws given to Israel can fit into those basic categories?
Tim: Yes. And each category expresses a core ideal of God’s wisdom, and the 
laws show how those ideals should be applied in the culture of ancient 
Israel. 
Jon: But as the story makes clear, Israel failed at fulfilling the law over and over. 
How is God going to get humans to trust his wisdom?
Tim: Well Moses and the prophets after him trusted that one day God would 
transform the human heart, so people can be faithful covenant partners 
who trust his wisdom. And that brings us to the story of Jesus. 
Jesus Fulfills the Law  
Jon: Yeah. Jesus said he came to fulfill the law.
Tim: Right. He was the faithful covenant partner that Israel and all humanity was 
made to be but has failed to be. Jesus lived by the divine ideals underlying 
the laws, and he taught that the laws are all fulfilled when you love God 
and love your neighbor as yourself. 
Jon: And Jesus promised that God’s Spirit would come and transform his 
followers so they too could live this way.
Tim: And so when followers of Jesus read these laws today, we need to 
remember they were given to Israel in their ancient cultural setting. You 
couldn’t follow many of them even if you tried!
Jon: But what you can do is see God’s wisdom in the laws.
Tim: Right, and trust that God’s Spirit can guide you to follow that wisdom as 
you learn to love God and to love your neighbor as yourself. 05:08–06:00