  1Introduction
If you tried to describe what God is like, it could be difficult or daunting. 
But when the people who wrote the Bible pondered the mystery of God, 
they consistently described God’s character in this way: compassionate 
and gracious, slow to anger, overflowing with loyal love and faithfulness.1
We’re going to look at this fourth phrase, loyal love. It translates the 
Hebrew word khesed , which is hard to translate into any language 
because it combines the ideas of love, generosity, and enduring 
commitment all into one. Khesed  describes an act of promise-
keeping loyalty that is motivated by deep personal care.   
Generous and Unconditional Khesed  
Like in the story of Ruth. Ruth is a foreigner married to an Israelite man. 
But tragically, her husband dies, along with his brother and his father. All 
Ruth has left is her widowed mother-in-law, Naomi, who has nothing to give 
her. Naomi tells Ruth she should go back to her people. But instead, Ruth 
promises to stay by Naomi’s side and take care of her. And as other people 
watch Ruth keep this promise over time, they call it an act of khesed .2
Notice that Ruth’s khesed  is not conditional or based on Naomi’s 
worth. Rather, it’s an expression of Ruth’s character. She just 
is a generous and loving person who keeps her word. That’s 
khesed . Now, Ruth’s loyal love is truly inspiring, but the one 
who shows the most enduring khesed  in the Bible is God.  
Undeserved Khesed  
Like in the story about Jacob, who is a treacherous liar, even to his own 
family. But despite that, God chooses him and repeats the promise 
he made to Jacob’s grandfather Abraham—that he would have a huge 
family, through whom God would restore his blessing to the nations.3 
And so twenty years later, when Jacob realizes how undeserving he is, Character of God: Loyal Love
Script References
1. Exodus 34:6
2. Ruth 3:10-11
3. Genesis 28:140:00-0:39
0:40-1:27
1:28-2:02  2he says to God, “I’m not worthy of all the khesed  you’ve shown me.” 4 
And he’s right. But God’s khesed  was never about Jacob’s worth in the 
first place! It’s a display of God’s generous loyalty to his promise. 
God’s Khesed  for Israel
God’s khesed  continues into the story of Jacob’s descendants, the 
Israelites. When they’re enslaved by Pharaoh in Egypt, we’re told 
that God remembered his promise to Abraham and Jacob. So God 
defeats Egypt and raises up Moses to liberate the people and lead 
them into the promised land. And in the story, this is called an 
act of khesed  5 because it was about God keeping his word.  
Now, on their way to the promised land, the Israelites are scared of the 
nations around them, and they doubt that God can protect them. So the 
people threaten to kill Moses and appoint a new leader to take them back 
to Egypt! God is understandably hurt and angry. But Moses steps in and 
says, “Forgive the sin of these people because of your great khesed .” 6 
Notice that Moses asks God to forgive not because the people deserve it 
but because it’s consistent with God’s own character. And God agrees, and 
he recommits himself to a people that don’t want to be committed to him. 
In the Bible, God is loyal and loving for no other reason than it’s just 
who God is. Of course he wants his people to respond with khesed  in 
return. But even when they don’t, God’s khesed  remains. The prophet 
Hosea compared Israel’s khesed  to a morning mist that’s here one 
moment and gone the next. 7 But God’s khesed  is enduring. Like in the 
celebration of Psalm 136 that opens by saying, “Give thanks to the Lord 
for he is good,” and then 26 times repeats, “his khesed  is forever.”
Jesus as God’s Khesed  
And so after centuries of Israel betraying their commitment to God, 
and after humanity’s long history of violence and death, God still 
kept his promise in a dramatic and drastic way: by becoming human 
and binding himself to us in the person of Jesus. And the people 
who followed Jesus of Nazareth said that, in him, they encountered 
the God of Israel who is “full of loyal love and faithfulness.” 
Jesus is the ultimate loyal and loving human. And in his life, death, 
and resurrection, God opened up a new future for all of us and 
for all of creation. And God did this because it’s just who God 
is, generous, loving, and eternally loyal to his promises.4. Genesis 32:10
5. Exodus 15:132:03-3:32
3:33-4:416. Numbers 14:19
7. Hosea 6:4  3And when we experience the purity and power of God’s loyal love 
shown through Jesus, it compels us to reimagine why and how we 
can show khesed  back to God and to the people around us. This is 
what it means to say that God is “overflowing with loyal love.”