  1Character of God 
Grace
SCRIPT REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION 0:00-0:37
If you tried to describe what God is like, it could be difficult or daunting. But when 
the people who wrote the Bible pondered the mystery of God, they consistently 
described God’s character in this way: compassionate and gracious, slow to an -
ger, overflowing with loyal love and faithfulness.1
We’re going to look at the second key word in this statement, “gracious.” The He -
brew word is khanun , which is related to the Hebrew noun khen . This word, khen , 
is often translated as “grace” or “favor.” And if you study how this word is used 
throughout the Bible, you’ll find a fascinating story.  
A GIFT GIVEN IN DELIGHT    0:38-1:31
One meaning of khen  is “delightful” or “favorable.” In the Psalms, a skilled poet is 
said to have “lips of khen ,” 2 that is, he can craft beautiful words that bring delight. 
Or a dazzling piece of jewelry is an “ornament of khen .” 3 It attracts attention and 
favor. 
This is why khen  is often the word used to describe a gift given with delight or 
favor. In these cases, khen  could be translated as “grace.” 
1. Exodus 34:6
2. Psalms 45:23. Proverbs 1:9    2Like in the story of Esther, who approaches the king of Persia to ask that she and 
her people be spared from death. She calls this a “request for khen ,” 4 and be -
cause the king delights in Esther, he favors her and grants her wish. 
So giving a gift of favor is khen  because it’s motivated by delight. And the most 
extreme kind of khen  is showing favor to someone who should get what they 
deserve not a generous gift.  
UNDESERVED FAVOR    1:32-2:28
Like Jacob, who cheated his brother Esau, ran away, and then after twenty years 
wants to come back and make things right. So he comes to Esau asking, “may I 
find khen  in your eyes?” 5 Jacob isn’t asking for what is fair but for favor. And sur -
prisingly, that’s what Esau gives him. He chooses to delight in his brother Jacob 
and show him grace that he doesn’t deserve.
Now, khen  requires a generous spirit, which people sometimes have. But in the 
Bible, the one who shows more khen  than anyone else is God. 
Like when God rescued the Israelites out of slavery in Egypt and they quickly be -
tray him by giving their allegiance to a golden idol as their god. But then Moses 
steps in and asks God to consider giving a gift that they don’t deserve. And God 
says yes by showing the ultimate act of khen —forgiveness and a promise to be 
with these people. 6
4. Esther 8:3
5. Genesis 33:86. Exodus 33:16    3A GRACIOUS GOD    2:29-4:08
This character trait of God is so reliable that over 40 times in the book of Psalms 
people cry out for God’s khen —when they’re sick, or in danger, or when the Isra -
elites are in exile. And the biblical prophets, like Isaiah, looked back to God’s khen  
in the past and boldly declared that God will one day show khen  to his people by 
delivering them, and all creation, from death and ruin.7
Now when we turn to the authors of the New Testament, they describe God’s 
khen  with the Greek word kharis , which means “gracious gift.” Like when we’re 
introduced to Jesus in the Gospel of John, we’re told that Jesus is God’s glori -
ous kharis  become human,8 sent into a world of people trapped in darkness and 
death.
Because, according to the apostle Paul, we’re like the living dead. God has hand -
ed humanity over to the destructive consequences of our selfish decisions. But, 
Paul says, God is rich in mercy, and by his kharis  he’s rescued us.9 He’s talking 
about how Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection are offered to us as a generous gift 
of life that is more powerful than death. And as with any gift, all one has to do is 
receive it. 
So now you can see why the biblical authors talk so much about this description 
of God’s character throughout the Bible. When people are willing to own their 
failures and ask God for khen , he has a consistent and generous response. God 
gives the gift of himself, his life, and his love. And this is what it means that God 
is gracious.
7. Isaiah 30:18-19
8. John 1:149. Ephesians 2:8