Day of the Lord 
Script References
Intro to the Day of the Lord  
Jon: The Day of the Lord. It’s a phrase in the Bible that religious people use, 
usually when talking about the end of the world. 
Tim: Yeah. Things like Armageddon or the apocalypse. You might be familiar 
with this image of Jesus returning on a white horse. He’s got a sword to 
bring final judgment. 
Jon: And everyone wants to know. How will it all go down?
The Setup 
Tim: So a lot of these images come from the last book of the Bible, but to 
understand them you have to go back to the first book. 
Jon: When the story begins, we watch God create an amazing world, and then 
he gives humans power to rule over it on his behalf. 1 
Tim: But then the humans are tempted by this mysterious un-human character, 
who offers them a promise. You could define good and evil on your own 
terms and put yourselves in God’s place. 2 
Jon: Which is what they do, and the resulting stories are about the broken 
relationships and violence that results.
Tim: Yeah. This promise creates huge problems. Now everyone has to protect 
themselves and fight for survival. And they’re all using death as this 
weapon to get power.
Jon: It all leads to a story about the building of the city of Babylon. 3 
Tim: Or in Hebrew, Babel. Everyone comes together to elevate themselves to 
the place of God. And God knows how devastating this could be—a whole 
culture redefining good and evil as if they are God.
Jon: So God confuses their language and scatters them. 00:00–00:20
00:21–01:58
1. Genesis 1–2
2. Genesis 3
3. Genesis 11Tim: Now from here on Babylon becomes like an icon in the biblical story. It’s an 
image that represents humanity’s corporate rebellion against God.
Jon: And the next time we see it is in the story of ancient Egypt. 4 
Tim: Yeah. Pharaoh, the king of Egypt, he feels threatened by these immigrant 
Israelites. He starts killing all the boys, enslaving the rest. 
Jon: This is really evil. 
Tim: Yeah. Egypt’s like this bigger, badder Babylon. They take care of 
themselves at the expense of others by redefining evil as good. And so 
God turns Pharaoh’s evil back on him. His pride drives him forward and 
he’s swallowed up by death. 
The Day  
Jon: Now, after this great deliverance, the Israelites sing a song about how God 
is their warrior who liberated them from evil. 5 
Tim: And the Israelites referred to this moment as, “the day.” 
Jon: The day they were rescued from a corrupt human system.
Tim: And every year since then, the Israelites have celebrated the day of their 
liberation with this symbolic meal of a sacrificial lamb. It’s called Passover. 6 
Israel Becomes Babylon 
Jon: Eventually, Israel comes into its own land, have their own kings, and they 
face new enemies.
Tim: So that past Day of the Lord, celebrated every Passover, begins to 
generate hope that God would bring the day again to save Israel from new 
threats. 
Jon: Now, out in the hills was a sheep herder named Amos. 
Tim: He was appointed by God as a prophet to announce shocking news to 
Israel—that God was bringing another Day of the Lord against his enemies, 
and this time the target is Israel. 7 
Jon: What?!
Tim: Sadly, Israel’s leaders had also redefined good and evil for themselves, 
resulting in corruption and violence.
Jon: So God’s people have become like Babylon? The oppressed become 
oppressors? Babylon seems like a trap no one can escape. 
Tim: And so the Day of the Lord comes upon Israel. They are conquered, taken 
captive into exile, and from then on, Israel suffered under the rule of 
continuous oppressive empires. 
Jesus and The Day 
Jon: This is the story Jesus was born into. 4. Exodus
01:59–02:21
5. Exodus 15:1–3, 18
6. Exodus 13:3
02:22–03:14
7. Amos 5:18
03:15–04:30Tim: Yeah. In his day, the oppressive empire over Israel is Rome. 
Jon: So is Jesus going to confront Rome? Take them out? 
Tim: Well, no. Jesus saw the real enemy as that mysterious unhuman evil, the 
evil that’s lured Babylon, Egypt, Rome, Israel. All humanity has given into 
evil’s promise of power. This is what Jesus resisted alone in the wilderness 
when he was tempted to exploit his power for self-interest. 8 
Jim: But he didn’t. And after that, he started confronting the effects of evil on 
others. 9 
Tim: Yeah. He started saying that he was going to Jerusalem for Passover for a 
final showdown, to confront the evil of Israel and Rome by dying. 
Jon: Dying? I mean, that feels like losing. 
Tim: Jesus was going to let evil exhaust all of its power on him, using its only 
real weapon, death. Jesus knew that God’s love and life were even more 
powerful, that he could overcome evil by becoming the Passover lamb, 
giving his life in an act of love. 10 
 And something changed that day. When Jesus defeated evil, he opened 
up a new way for anyone to escape from Babylon and discover this new 
kind of power, this new way of being human.
The Great Day of the Lord  
Jon: Okay, so something changed. But the power of evil is still alive and well. 
We keep building new versions of Babylon.
Tim: Right, and so the last book of the Bible, the Revelation, points to the future 
and final Day of the Lord. It’s when God’s Kingdom comes to confront 
“Babylon the great,” this image of all the corrupt nations of the world. 
Jon: Yeah! This is it—armageddon! Final judgement! How is Jesus going to 
finish off evil? 
Tim: Well, it’s not how you’d expect. In the Revelation, the victorious Jesus is 
symbolized by a sacrificial, bloody lamb. And then when Jesus does arrive 
in the end, riding his white horse to confront evil, he's bloody before the 
battle even starts. 11 
Jon: Pre-bloodied? That’s a strange image.
Tim: Yeah. It’s because Jesus isn’t out for our blood. Rather, he overcame with 
his blood when he died for his enemies. And the sword is in his mouth. 
It’s a symbol of Jesus’ authority to define good and evil and hold us 
accountable when he brings final justice once and for all. 12 
Jon: And so in the meantime, the Day of the Lord is an invitation to resist the 
culture of Babylon.
Tim: And it’s a promise that God will one day free our world from corruption 
and bring about the new things that he has in store. 8. Matthew 4:1–11
Matthew 12:24–29
Luke 11:15–229. Mark 3:22–27
Matthew 27:54Matthew 27:5110. Matthew 27:45
04:31–05:46
12:11; 19:11–16, 2111. Revelation 5:5, 6; 7:14
12. Revelation 7:14