The Divine Council
Script References
00:00-00:40 The Spiritual Realm
Tim:  For most of human history, people have believed in some kind of spiritual 
realm that exists alongside the world as we know it. 
Jon:  Right, and the biblical authors are no exception. 
Tim:  Yeah. For them, the spiritual realm is a different kind of realm than ours. 
And to highlight that difference, the Bible refers to God’s space as the sky 
or the heavens.
Jon:  Because the sky is really different from the land. It’s above and beyond,  
and up there are shiny bodies that move around. I think of these as flaming 
gas balls.
Tim:  But when the biblical authors looked up, the stars gave them a way to talk 
and think about spiritual beings. In the Bible, they’re called the sons of 
God, or the rulers and authorities, or even sometimes the divine council.1
The Divine Council
Jon:  So that sounds really  important. What does the divine council do?
Tim:  Well, they’re introduced in Genesis 1 where they’re called the host of 
heaven, that is, the sun, moon, and stars. And there, they’re also called 
signs, meaning that their power and status symbolizes and points to God’s 
power and status.2
Jon:  Yeah, so in Genesis 1, God appoints them to rule over the  
day and the night.
Tim:  Exactly. And then later in the Bible, we’re told that they were celebrating 
God’s power and creativity when he created the world.3
Jon:  Like the cheering section of a game!1. Psalm 89:5-7;  
Psalm 29:1-2;  
Job 38:4-5, 7;  
Job 1:6-7;  
1 Kings 22:19-22;  
Psalm 82:1;  
Jeremiah 23:18, 23;  
Job 15:7-8;  
Isaiah 6:1-4, 8
00:41-01:51
2. Genesis 1:14-18,  
1:26-30; Genesis 2:1
3. Job 38:6-7Tim:  Yeah! Right! There are also stories in the Bible where God invites the divine 
council to participate in making a decision, like when they help decide 
how to bring down the corrupt Israelite King Ahab,4 or in the book of Job 
where they debate God’s policy of rewarding people who do good.5
Jon:  So they’re like God’s staff team. But why does God need a team? If he’s 
powerful enough to create the whole universe, he could surely rule it 
without any help.
Tim:  Well, he doesn’t need  them, but apparently the God of the Bible wants to 
share authority with others.
Jon:  Oh right. God shares his rule with human partners on the Earth, and so in 
the same way, there’s a parallel story of God sharing his authority to rule 
with spiritual partners.
Twin Rebellion
Tim:  Yes, that is until it all falls apart in a twin rebellion. So you have humans 
who want to rule on Earth on their own terms, so they start building their 
own nation using their own definitions of good and evil. 
Jon:  Yeah, the famous story of the building of Babylon.6
Tim:  But check this out. When biblical authors like Moses or Isaiah looked back 
at the origins of Babylon, they saw more than just a human rebellion but 
also a spiritual rebellion.7
Jon:  What was the spiritual rebellion?
Tim:  Well, there were members of the divine council who, like the humans, 
didn’t want to represent God’s authority anymore. They wanted to be God 
and they rebelled. And so these created beings deceived humans into 
worshiping them instead of the creator. And so Babylon becomes the 
biblical image for the combined human and spiritual rebellion.8
Jon:  And so God scatters the people from Babylon into different nations.
Tim:  And in the book of Deuteronomy, Moses says this is when God also 
scattered the rebels of the divine council with them.9
Jon:  So the nations are handed over to spiritual rulers.
Tim:  Yes, and this is why when the biblical prophets look out at the violent 
empires of their day, they see two dimensions to all the chaos and 
injustice: human rebels who are being corrupted by the worship of 
spiritual rebels, the idol-gods of money, sex, and military power. 
Jon:  Yeah. When humans give their allegiance to these powers, it leads to a 
world like ours. 5. Job 1:6-7
01:52-03:534. 1 Kings 22:19-22
7. Deuteronomy 4:16-20; 
Deuteronomy 32:8-9; 
Isaiah 14:11-156. Genesis 11
8. Genesis 3; Genesis 6; 
Genesis 10: 1, 2-5, 6-20, 
21-31; Genesis 11:1-9
9. Deuteronomy 32:8-9Tim:  Right, and the best example of this is the story of the Exodus, where we’re 
told that the Egyptian genocide of the Israelites was inspired by Pharaoh 
and by the gods of Egypt. 
Jon:  That’s really intense. 
Tim:  But it’s not the end of the story. When God rescued the Israelites from 
Egypt and its gods, he invited them to become his covenant partners and 
learn a different way of ruling the world.
Jon:  And they agree to it, but in the end they don’t honor the partnership.  
They give their allegiance to other gods.
Tim:  And so this leads to their exile in Babylon, where they become slaves once 
again to a foreign nation and their spiritual rulers, awaiting a new exodus 
into freedom.
Jesus Takes Back the World From the Rebels
Tim:  And this is where the story of Jesus picks up. He said he was here to 
rescue the world and take it back from the rebels. 
Jon:  Which rebels? The human ones or the spiritual ones?
Tim:  Exactly. For Jesus, it was all connected. When he marched into Jerusalem 
for Passover, he was announcing the ultimate exodus. He was there to 
confront and overcome all rebel powers and authorities, and he did it by 
giving up his life. 
Jon:  So this is what the Apostle Paul meant when he said that “[Jesus] disarmed 
the powers and authorities ... triumphing over them by the cross.” 10
Tim:  Yes, Jesus condemned our evil by allowing the rebels to unleash all their 
hate and evil on him. But then he overcame it with the power of his love 
and resurrection life. And then Jesus told his followers that all authority in 
Heaven and Earth now belongs to him.
Jon:  Yeah. The ultimate human and divine partner! This is really good news!
Tim:  Yes! And it’s why the apostles started inviting everyone to give their 
allegiance to the risen Jesus, to discover freedom and a new way  
to be human.
Humanity’s Real Enemy
Jon:  Now, while Jesus gained a decisive victory over the rebel powers, he didn’t 
destroy them. They’re still around causing problems. 
Tim:  Yes, and in fact, they are the problem. The apostles said that humanity’s 
real enemy is never another human. Rather, it’s the spiritual powers that 
animate our cultural idols that inspire hatred, division, and violence.1103:54-04:56
10. Colossians 2:15
11. Ephesians 6:10-1704:57-05:47Jon:  Ah, so when I see people hurting people, behind it is the divine council 
gone rogue. How do we deal with this kind of enemy?
Tim:  Well, the Apostle Paul said we can resist by putting on the character  
traits of Jesus like armor: faithfulness, justice, and peace. And he said  
that our only weapon is the word of God, that is, the biblical story of  
good news that Jesus has overcome all rebels with the divine power  
of his life and love.12 
Credits
Jon:  You just watched a video on the divine council.
Tim:  Now, there are more spiritual beings in the heavenly realm along with the 
divine council. They’re called angels and cherubim. And that’s what we’re 
going to look at next.12. Ephesians 6:13-17
06:03-06:13