Torah Series: Exodus 1-18
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: Let's talk about the book of Exodus. Now, you’re probably familiar with this 
book because of the epic story of Moses leading Israel out of slavery from 
Egypt. 1 
Tim: Yeah, but that’s just the first half of the book. The second half has Moses 
giving the ten commandments to Israel along with these blueprints 
for making a sacred tent. Now right here in the middle is the story that 
connects these two halves together, and it all takes place at the foot of a 
famous mountain. 
Jon: Okay, so let’s start back at the beginning.
Israelites Enslaved  
Tim: So the first thing we have to remember is we’re continuing the story from 
Genesis.
Jon: Yeah. In Genesis, God promised Abraham that through his family all the 
nations of the earth will be blessed. 2 And Genesis ends with Abraham’s 
family down in Egypt. When Exodus begins, 400 years have passed. The 
family grows and becomes the people group now called Israel. 
Tim: But there’s this huge problem because the Israelites are enslaved to this 
king of the Egyptians, a guy called Pharaoh. 
Jon: This guy is really bad news.
Tim: Yeah. He’s horrible. He disregards their humanity, he brutally enslaves 
them, and he even orders that all of the Israelites' sons should be killed by 
throwing them into the Nile river. 3 He wants to wipe these people out. He 
is the worst character in the Bible so far. 
Jon: Here’s where we meet an Israelite woman who wants to save her son. 400:00–00:25
1. Exodus 1-14
00:26–01:30
2. Genesis 12
3. Exodus 1:15-22
4. Exodus 2:1-4Tim: And so she does throw him in the river, but safely in this little reed basket. 
Jon: And Pharaoh's daughter finds this baby and takes him as her own. 
Tim: This is the boy who grows up to become Moses, the man who will rescue 
Israel from slavery.
God Calls Moses to Rescue the Israelites  
Jon: So Moses grows up, and one day, much later in his life, he has this crazy 
encounter with God where he comes across a bush that’s on fire but it isn’t 
actually burning up. 5
Tim: And God speaks from the bush and he appoints Moses as the man he will 
use to deliver Israel. 6
Jon: So Moses goes to Pharaoh to tell him this news—that God wants his 
people free. 7
Tim: And Pharaoh, he just pretty much laughs at him. He’s like, “Who’s this God 
Yahweh?” And in fact, he’s so offended by this request he decides to make 
the Israelite's work even harder. 8 
Jon: So discouraged, Moses goes back to God and says, “Listen, this plan’s not 
going to work.” 
Tim: But God repeats his promise that he’s going to rescue them. And in 
fact, it’s right here for the first time in the Bible that we hear the word 
“redemption.” 9 It literally just means to purchase a slave’s freedom, but 
God here uses this word to describe what he’s going to do for enslaved 
Israel.
The Ten Plagues  
Jon: And God knows Pharaoh is going to resist, so he sends 10 different 
plagues, one after another, like turning water into blood, sending all sorts 
of pests and disease. These plagues are really  severe. 10
Tim: They are severe, but we need to understand that the story’s presenting 
these as acts of divine justice against one of the worst oppressors in the 
story of the Bible. And they’re all aimed at the purpose of rescuing these 
enslaved people and defeating the gods of Egypt.
Jon: This all comes to a climax at the tenth plague, where God’s going to kill 
the firstborn sons across all Egypt—every house. It’s pretty rough. 
Tim: It is. But it’s also God’s response for how Pharoah killed the Israelite sons.
Jon: And as you turn the page, you suddenly get two long chapters of detailed 
instructions for what’s essentially throwing a dinner party with a recipe for 
a lamb. 1101:31–02:25
5. Exodus 3:1-9
6. Exodus 3:10-22
7. Exodus 5
8. Exodus 5:6-22
9. Exodus 6:6
02:26–03:46
10. Exodus 7-11
11. Exodus 12Tim: Yeah, but this lamb is super important. God tells the Israelites to pick it out 
and to prepare it to be eaten. And they’re supposed to take its blood and 
then paint it all over the door frame of their house, and anyone who is in 
that house will be spared from this final plague. And so this meal, which 
is called Passover, it commemorates this key moment in the story where 
God brings his justice on human evil but also shows mercy by providing 
this substitute.
Pharaoh's Hardened Heart  
Jon: This final plague makes Pharaoh angry, and he demands that Israel gets 
out of Egypt, which is great. But suddenly, as they leave, Pharaoh changes 
his mind. He has a change of heart.
Tim: But on top of that, we’re also told that God hardens Pharaoh's heart. 12
Jon: Why would God do that? 
Tim: Well, what we need to remember is that over and over in the story Pharaoh 
has already chosen to harden his own  heart. And so at this point, Pharaoh, 
he’s not just evil. He’s become monstrously evil. Even his own advisors 
think that he has gone way too far. And so how is God supposed to deal 
with such an extreme form of evil? And what we see in this story is that 
God uses his power to lure evil into its own destruction. 
Jon: Pharoah and his army are destroyed in the Red Sea as Israel passes into 
freedom. 13
Song of Salvation  
Tim: And after this, we find the very first song of worship in the Bible as the 
people praise God for redeeming them. And it’s in this story that the 
word “salvation” is also used for the first time, which means simply to “be 
rescued from danger.” 14 
Jon: Now that they’re saved, you would think that everything should be great, 
but the story quickly turns. The Israelites start wandering in the desert. 
They’re tired, hungry, lost, and you start to wonder, what’s God doing? 
What were they saved for?
Tim: And we learn the answer to that question in the very next story, which ties 
the two parts of this whole book together.03:47–04:31
12. Exodus 11:10
13. Exodus 14:26-29
04:31–05:04
14. Exodus 15:2