Genesis Part 2 of 2 
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: We're walking through the book of Genesis, which is made up of these two 
main parts.
Tim: And the first part begins in the garden where we watch humanity spiral 
downward in self-destruction. And it ends in the Tower of Babel where a 
rebellious humanity is scattered by God.
Jon: Then the second part of Genesis zooms in and focuses on just one family.
Tim: And right in the middle is this story that links the two parts of Genesis 
together and helps us understand what the whole book is all about.
Jon: So how do we get from the Tower of Babel to the story here in the middle?
The Story of Abraham  
Tim: Well, after the scattering at Babel, there's a genealogy, and it follows one 
of the tribes all the way down to this one guy named Abram. 1
Jon: You probably know him as Abraham.
Tim: And God starts making all these promises to Abraham, like he's going to 
bless him and give him a ton of kids. And he says that through him and his 
family, all the nations of the earth are now going to find God's blessing. 
So basically, God is trying to restore humanity back to the goodness 
of the garden and to his original intentions for the world. So it's like his 
rescue plan for humanity. And that's why the whole second half of Genesis 
is about this one family. And so you have Abraham, and then he has a 
son Isaac, who has Jacob, and then Jacob has twelve sons. And to each 
generation, God renews his promise to bless them and all nations through 
them.
Jon: So because of this promise to use this family to rescue the world, it's 
pretty easy to read these stories as examples of how to be a good person.00:00–00:34
00:35–02:15
1. Genesis 12Tim: But actually, for the most part, this family is totally dysfunctional. So for 
example, let's go back to Abraham. This whole story is about God giving 
him and his wife Sarah a family, but two different times he basically gives 
Sarah away to other men by denying that she's even his wife. 2 And then 
Sarah gets impatient about having a son, and so she makes Abraham 
sleep with her servant girl, which then causes all of these other problems 
in the family. 3
Jon: So they get really old, and you begin to think that there's no way they're 
going to have a kid of their own. But then, miraculously, they do. It's Isaac. 4
Tim: And Isaac, he has two sons, Esau and Jacob. And it seems like things are 
going pretty good. 5
The Story of Jacob  
Jon: But Jacob, the younger brother, wants the family's inheritance, which 
belongs to Esau the older brother. So he devises a plan where he’s going 
to steal it from his father Isaac, who at this point in the story is now old and 
blind. 6
Tim: Which who does that? It’s horrible—stealing from your blind father.
Jon: Yeah, and then he just takes off.
The Story of Joseph  
Tim: So Jacob goes on from there to have twelve sons, big family. But Jacob 
loves his eleventh son, Joseph, way more than all the others. And so he 
gives him a special, technicolor dream coat. And his brothers, because of 
this, come to hate him. 7
Jon: So much so that they plan on killing him.
Tim: But they don't. They Instead just sell him as a slave down in Egypt. 8
Jon: Now, while in Egypt, through this crazy series of events, Joseph goes from 
being in a prison cell to becoming the second-in-command there. 9
Tim: And so later on, the whole Middle East falls into this food shortage. And 
Joseph's brothers, they come down to Egypt looking for food. And then 
when they get there, who should they find as the ruler of the whole land? 10
Jon: It's Joseph, that guy they sold into slavery. But he actually saves them from 
starving to death.
Tim: And so here you have it. These are the great-grandchildren of Abraham 
who have done this heinous act to their brother, but God has transformed 
their evil into something good.
Jon: And that's exactly what Joseph says here in the last paragraph of the entire 2. Genesis 12:10-20; 20
3. Genesis 16
4. Genesis 21
5. Genesis 25:19-28
02:16–02:34
6. Genesis 27
02:35–03:48
7. Genesis 37:1-11
8. Genesis 37:12-36
9. Genesis 39-41
10. Genesis 42book. He says, "You guys planned all of this for evil, but God planned it for 
good to save people's lives." 11
Conclusion of Genesis  
Tim: Now, these words conclude the book because they actually summarize 
the message of the whole story so far. Humans keep choosing evil, and 
we are thinking they're screwing up God's plan, but he keeps turning their 
evil back into good. And somehow he’s going to use this family to restore 
humanity back to the garden. 
Jon: So that’s the book of Genesis. But we still don’t know how exactly he’s 
going to use this family to bring us back to the garden. 
Tim: Well yeah, but this is just the first book. So that’s what the rest of the Bible 
sets out to answer.11. Genesis 50:20
03:49–04:22