Holy Spirit
Script References
Chaos to Creation  
Jon: If you’ve ever heard the phrase “the Holy Spirit” and you want to know 
what it means, where do you start? 
Tim: Well, you have to start on page one of the Bible where the uncreated world 
is depicted as this dark, chaotic place. But then above the chaos, God’s 
Spirit is there hovering, ready to bring about life and order and beauty.1
Jon: Okay, but what is God’s Spirit?
Tim: Yeah, so the Spirit is the way the biblical authors talk about God’s personal 
presence. The Hebrew word is ruakh.
Jon: Ruakh.
Tim Yeah. You’ve got to clear your throat at the end.
Jon: So what is it?
Tim: Well, ruakh can refer to a number of different things, but what they all have 
in common is energy. 
Jon: Energy? How so?
Tim: So there’s an invisible energy that makes the clouds move or the tree 
branches sway.
Jon: Right, wind.
Tim: So in Hebrew, that’s ruakh. 
Jon: Okay.
Tim: Now, take a big breath. So you feel that inside you?
Jon: Yeah. The air?
Tim: Well, specifically the energy. The vitality in your body that you get from 
breathing deeply, that too is ruakh. 00:00–01:17
1. Genesis 1 And  this is the same word used in the Bible to describe God’s personal 
presence. Just like wind and breath are invisible, God’s Spirit is invisible. 
Wind is powerful, and so God’s Spirit is powerful. And just as breath keeps 
us alive, so God’s Spirit sustains all of life.2  
Jon: Yeah, ruakh.
Empowering Humans  
Tim: Now, as we continue on in the story of the Bible, we see God’s ruakh giving 
special empowerment to people for specific tasks. The first person in the 
Bible this happens to is Joseph.3
Jon: God’s Spirit enables him to understand and interpret dreams.
Tim: And then it happens to this guy named Bezalel, and he’s an artist.4
Jon: God’s Spirit empowers him with wisdom and skills. He’s given creative 
genius to make the beautiful things in the tabernacle. 
Tim: And we also see God’s ruakh empower a group of people called the 
prophets.
Jon: They’re able to see what’s happening in history from God’s point of view.  
Tim: That’s exactly right. 
New Chaos to New Creation  
Tim: And here’s the problem as the prophets saw it. While God’s ruakh had 
created a really good world, humans have given into evil. They’ve 
unleashed chaos into it through their injustice.  
Jon: A new type of disorder.
Tim: Yes. And the prophets said the Spirit would come, just like in Genesis 1, 
but now to transform the human heart, to empower people to truly love 
God and others.5
Empowering Jesus to Begin New Creation  
Jon: How will this new act of God’s Spirit happen?
Tim: Well, centuries pass and we are introduced to Jesus. And at the beginning 
of his mission, there’s this beautiful scene where Jesus is being baptized in 
the waters of the Jordan River.6
Jon: Yeah. The sky opens up and God’s Spirit comes and rests on him like a 
bird.
Tim: This story’s saying that God’s Spirit is empowering Jesus to begin the new 
creation. And we see this happening when he heals people or forgives 
their sins. He’s creating life where there once was death.2. Genesis 2:7;  
 Job 27:3;  
 Ecclesiastes 12:7;  
 Job 34:14-15
01:18–01:51
3. Genesis 41:38
4. Exodus 31:1-10
01:52–02:14
5. Isaiah 11, 32:15;  
 Ezekiel 36-37
02:15–03:22
6. Luke 3:21-22Jon: Now, Israel’s religious leaders oppose Jesus, and they eventually have him 
killed. 
Tim: But even here God’s Spirit is at work. The earliest disciples of Jesus, who 
saw him alive from the dead, said it was God’s energizing Spirit that raised 
Jesus. 
Jon: This is the beginning of new creation.
Tim: Yes, and it’s still going. When Jesus appeared to his closest followers, he 
breathed on them and said, “Receive the Holy Spirit.”7  
Jon: And soon after that, the Spirit powerfully comes on all of his disciples.8  
Tim: So that they can become part of this new creation and share the good 
news and learn how to live by the energy and influence of God’s Spirit.  
New Creation  
Jon: And so today, the Spirit is still hovering in dark places.
Tim: Yes, pointing people to Jesus, transforming and empowering them so 
they can love God and others. And the Christian hope is that the Spirit is 
going to finish the job. The story of the Bible ends with a vision of a new 
humanity living in a new world that’s permeated with God’s love and life-
giving Spirit.7. John 20:21-22
8. Acts 2:1-3
03:23–03:49