Sin 
Script References
Introduction  
Most people assume the Bible has a lot to say about how messed up humans 
are, and that’s true. It’s also true that the Bible’s vocabulary about this topic 
sounds odd to modern people, using words like sin, iniquity, or transgression. 
And so the Bible’s perspective on the human condition is often ignored or 
treated as ancient and backwards.
This is really unfortunate because through these words, the biblical authors are 
offering us a deeply profound diagnosis of human nature. Iniquity describes 
behavior that’s crooked, while transgression refers to breaking trust, and sin? 
This is actually the most common of these “bad words” in the Bible. So let’s 
focus on it for a few minutes.
The Hebrew Word Khata   
Sin translates to the Hebrew word khata‘ and the Greek word hamartia. The 
most basic meaning of sin isn’t religious at all. Khata’ simply means “to fail,” or 
“miss the goal.” Like when the Israelite tribe of Benjamin trained a small army of 
slingshot experts, they could sling a stone at a hair and not khata’, that is, fail 
or miss.1  Or there’s a biblical Proverb that warns against making hasty decisions 
because you’re likely to khata‘ your way, miss your destination.2
So in the Bible, sin is a failure to fulfill a goal. But what’s the goal? Well, on page 
one of the Bible, we learn that every human is an image of God, a sacred being 
who represents the Creator and is worthy of respect. And so in this way of 
seeing the world, sin is a failure to love God and others by not treating them 
with the honor they deserve. 
You can see this idea in the famous code of conduct given to the Israelites,  
the ten commandments. Half of them identify ways you can fail at loving  
God, and the other half name ways you can fail at loving people. And the  
fact that both kinds of failure are combined shows that failing to honor God is 
deeply connected to failing to honor people. 00:00–00:44
00:45–02:54
1. Judges 20:16
2. Proverbs 19:2This is why, in the Bible, sin against people is sin against God. Like when  
Joseph refuses to sleep with the wife of Potiphar, he says, “How could I sin  
against God?”3  In Joseph’s mind, failing to honor a human made in God’s  
image is a failure to love God. And so sin is a failure to be truly human.  
But there’s more.
A fascinating thing about sin in the Bible is that most of the time that people 
are failing, they either don’t know it, or even worse, they think they’re 
succeeding, like when Pharaoh wants to build Egypt’s economy and protect 
national security. In his mind, this justifies enslaving the Israelites. He thinks it’s 
good, and he’s totally unaware that it’s an epic fail.4  Or when King Saul is  
chasing David around the wilderness trying to kill him, he thought he was  
bringing a criminal to justice, until he realizes he’s the corrupt one. And he  
says, “I  have sinned. I am the failure.”5  So sin is about more than doing bad  
things. It describes how easily we deceive ourselves and spin illusions to  
redefine our bad decisions as good ones.
Why Do Humans Sin? 
So why are humans such bad judges between moral failure and success? 
Well, the first appearance of the word sin in the Bible offers an insight. There 
are these two brothers, Cain and Abel. Their parents had just given into this 
beastly temptation to redefine good and evil by their own wisdom, and now 
Cain is faced with a similar choice. He’s jealous and angry that God has favored 
his brother, and so God warns him. “If you don’t choose what is good, khata’ 
is crouching at the door. It wants you, but you can rule over it.” So in these 
stories, sin, or moral failure, is depicted as this wild, hungry animal that wants 
to consume humans. And we know how that story ends.
The Bible is trying to tell us that failed human behavior, our tendency toward 
self-deception, it runs deep. It’s rooted in our desires and selfish urges that 
compel us to act for our own benefit at the expense of others. And it leads  
to this chain reaction of relational breakdown.
This is why, in the New Testament, the apostle Paul describes hamartia as a 
power or a force that rules humans.6  In his words, “We are slaves to sin.”7   
He even says, “sin lives in us,” so that “the things I don’t want to do, that’s what 
I do!”8  
So with the word sin, the biblical authors are offering a robust description of 
the human condition. It’s a failure to be humans who fully love God and others. 
It’s our inability to judge whether we’re succeeding or failing. And it’s that deep 
selfish impulse that drives much of our behavior. This is not a pretty picture of 
ourselves. But if we’re honest, it’s realistic.  3. Genesis 37:9
4. Exodus 5:16
5. 1 Samuel 26:21
02:55–04:30
6. Romans 5:21
7. Romans 6:6
8. Romans 7:15-16Jesus, the True Human 
This is why in the Bible, the story of Jesus is such good news. He’s depicted as 
the Creator become a truly human one, who did not fail to love God and  
others, that is, he did not sin. And yet he took responsibility for humanity’s  
history of failure. He lived for others, and he died for their sins. And he was  
raised from the dead to offer them the gift of his life that covers for their  
failures. Or in the words of the apostles, “He committed no sin, yet he  
carried our sins in his body on the cross, so that we might die to our sins  
and live to do what is right.”9
And that’s the story behind the biblical word for sin.04:31–05:15
9. 1 Peter 2:22-24