Literary Styles in the Bible 
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: The Bible is a collection of many books telling one unified story from 
beginning to end. But all those books were written in different literary 
styles.
Tim: Yeah. Think of it like walking into a bookstore where every aisle has a 
different kind of literature. There’s history, or poetry, or nonfiction. When 
you choose an aisle and pick up a book, you’re going to have very different 
expectations, different things that you’re looking for.
Jon: Right. They’re all literature, but they communicate in really different ways.
Tim: Yes, and so the same thing is true for the Bible. If you don’t pay attention 
to what style it’s written in, you will miss out on the brilliance of each book.
Jon: So what are the main types of literature in the Bible? 
Narrative  
Tim: Well, first and foremost is narrative. That makes up a whopping 43 percent 
of the Bible. After that is poetry, which is 33 percent of the Bible. And 
then there’s what you could call prose discourse, which makes up the 
remaining 24 percent.
Jon: Nearly half of the Bible is narrative?!
Tim: Yes, and this is no accident. Stories are the most universal form of human 
communication. Our brains are actually hardwired to take in information 
through story.  
Jon: And stories are really enjoyable. Why is that?
Tim: Well, stories train us to make sense of the seemingly random events that  
happen in life by taking those events and them putting them in a 
sequence. And then together you can start to see the meaning and 
purpose of it all. 00:00–00:36
00:37–02:26Jon: And what links this all together?
Tim: Well, good stories always have a character who wants something. And 
then through these characters the author can explore life’s big questions, 
like “Who are we?” or “What’s really important in life?” 
 And a good story always involves some kind of conflict.
Jon: Some challenge to be overcome, just like in our own lives.
Tim: And that forces us to think about our own challenges—why there’s so 
much pain and disappointment in the world—and then what can we do 
about it. And stories usually end with some kind of resolution, giving us 
hope for our own stories. 
Jon: Since these are Bible stories, are the characters showing me how I should 
live? 
Tim: Yeah, that’s not quite the point. Most Bible characters are deeply flawed—
you should not be like them. But we are supposed to see ourselves 
in them, which helps us then see our lives and failures from a new 
perspective. And without even realizing it, these stories will start to 
mess with you and change how you see the world and other people and 
yourself.
Jon: Now, there are different types of narrative in the Bible.
Tim: Yeah. There’s historical narrative, but also narrative parables, and short 
biographical narratives like the four Gospels. We’ll look at all these in later 
videos. 
Poetry  
Jon: Okay. Next up is poetry, which honestly I don’t read a lot of. 
Tim: Yeah. You’re like most people. But one out of every three chapters in the 
Bible is poetry.
Jon: Yeah. Why so much poetry?
Tim: Well, poems mainly speak through dense, creative language, linking 
together images to help us envision the world differently. Poems use lots 
of metaphor to evoke your emotions and your imagination. 
Jon: Lots of fancy language, but wouldn’t it be easier just to tell me what I need 
to know?
Tim: Well, think about it. In life, we tend to form mental ruts, and we think in 
these familiar, well-worn paths that are very hard to get out of through 
logic or reasoning. And what good poetry does is force you off the familiar 
path into new territory.
Jon: Sneaky.02:27–03:20Tim: And there are different types of poetry in the Bible. There’s lots of types of 
songs, or psalms. There’s the reflective poetry of the wisdom books, and 
then the passionate resistance poetry of the prophets. 
Prose Discourse  
Jon: Okay. The last big literary type is called prose discourse, and it makes up a 
quarter of the Bible. 
Tim: Yeah. These are speeches, letters, or essays. And the focus here is building 
a sequence of ideas or thoughts into one linear argument that requires a 
logical response.
 Like hey have you thought about this thing? You should also consider how 
it connects to this other thing. And if you do, then you’ll see that this is the 
result. And in light of that conclusion, therefore, you should probably stop 
doing that one thing so that this other thing will be the outcome. 
Jon: So you are persuading me with reason.
Tim: Yeah. Discourse forces you to think logically and consistently and then 
do something about it. Biblical discourse is found in law collections, in 
wisdom literature, and the letters written by the apostles. 
Conclusion  
Jon: Okay, so each book of the Bible has one literary style. 
Tim: No. Actually most books have a primary literary style, like narrative for 
example. But then embedded in the narrative, you’ll come across poems 
or parables or collections of laws. Every book is a unique combination of 
literary styles.
Jon: And to read that book well, I need to become familiar with each literary 
type and how it works. 
Tim: Yeah, so you know what to pay attention to and what questions you should 
ask. But before we look at each type, there’s one more unifying feature of 
biblical literature that’s really important and really cool. And that is what 
we’ll explore next.03:21–04:04
04:05–04:43