Shema: Soul
Script References
Introduction and Historical Baggage  
For thousands of years every morning and evening, Jewish people have prayed 
these well-known words as a way of expressing their devotion to God. They’re 
called the Shema.
Hear O Israel, the LORD is our God the LORD is one, and as for you, you shall 
love the LORD your God with all of your heart, with all of your soul, and with all 
of your strength.1  
We’re going to look at the word soul. The Hebrew word is nephesh . It occurs 
over 700 times in the Old Testament. The common English translation of this 
word is soul, and that's kind of unfortunate. Here’s why.
The English word soul comes with lots of baggage from ancient Greek 
philosophy. It’s the idea that the soul is a non-physical, immortal essence of a 
person that’s contained or trapped in their body to be released at death. It's a 
“ghost in the machine” kind of idea. This notion is totally foreign to the Bible. 
It's not at all what nephesh  means in biblical Hebrew.
Nephesh in the Hebrew Bible  
The most basic meaning of nephesh  is throat. Like when the Israelites are 
wandering in the wilderness, they're hungry and thirsty, and they say to God, 
“we miss the cucumbers and melons we had in Egypt, and now our nephesh  
has dried up!”2  Or when Joseph was hauled off into slavery in Egypt, his 
nephesh  was put into iron shackles.3
But nephesh  doesn’t only mean throat. Since your whole life and body depend 
on what comes in and out of your throat, nephesh  could also be used to refer 
to the whole person. 
Like in Genesis, there were thirty-three nephesh  in Jacob’s family, that is, 
thirty-three people.4  In the Torah, a murderer is called a nephesh  slayer,5  and 
a kidnapper is called a nephesh  thief.6  On the first pages of the Bible, both 00:00–00:56
1. Deuteronomy 6:4-5
00:57–02:14
2. Numbers 11:5
3. Psalm 105:18
4. Genesis 46:15
5. Numbers 31:19
6. Deuteronomy 24:7humans and animals are called a living nephesh . And if the life-breath has left a 
human or animal, the nephesh  remains. It’s just called a dead nephesh , that is, 
a corpse.
So in the Bible, people don’t have a nephesh ; rather, they are a nephesh —a 
living, breathing, physical being. Now that might surprise you because most 
people assume the Bible says the soul is what survives apart from the body 
after death. And while the biblical authors do have a concept of people 
existing after death waiting for their resurrection, they rarely talk about it. And 
when they do, they don’t use the word nephesh .
Nephesh as the Whole Physical Being   
So even though nephesh  is often translated as soul, the Hebrew word really 
refers to the whole human as a living, physical organism. In fact, this is why 
biblical people can often use this word to refer to themselves. And it gets 
translated “me” or “I.” Like in Psalm 119, most translations read, “let me live, that 
I may praise you.”7  In Hebrew, the poet literally says, “let my nephesh  live, that it 
may praise you." By using nephesh , the poet emphasizes that their entire being, 
their life and their body, offer thanks to God.
In the Song of Songs, the young woman constantly refers to her lover as 
“the one my nephesh  loves.”7  And of course, love isn’t just an intellectual 
experience. It’s an emotion that activates your whole body, your entire 
nephesh .
This helps us understand the brilliance of other biblical poets who could 
combine multiple meanings of nephesh  in one place. Like in Psalm 42, we read, 
“as the deer pants for the water, so my nephesh  pants after you, my nephesh  
thirsts for the living God.”9  So on a physical level, your throat can be thirsty like 
a deer’s, but then that physical thirst can become a metaphor for how your 
whole physical being longs to know and be known by your creator.
Which brings us all the way back to the Shema. To love God with all your 
nephesh  means to devote your whole physical existence to your creator, the 
one who granted us these amazing bodies in the first place. It’s about offering 
your entire being with all of its capabilities and limitations in the effort to love 
God and to love your neighbor as yourself. And that’s the Hebrew  
word for soul.02:15–03:55
7. Psalm 119:175
8. Song of Songs 3:1
9. Psalm 42:2-3