  1How to Read the Bible   
New Testament Letters  
SCRIPT REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION 00:00/hyphen.uc00:25
Jon: Near the end of the Bible are 21 letters from leaders of the early Jesus move -
ment. They were written to small church communities in cities of the Roman 
world. 
Tim: Writing letters took a lot of e/uniFB00ort and money in the ancient world. So each 
one was carefully crafted from beginning to end, which means we should 
read them as a whole literary work. 
Jon: So let’s talk about how to read New Testament letters in their literary context.
PAUL’S TEAM OF WRITERS    00:26/hyphen.uc01:45
Jon: Of all the early Christian leaders, the apostle Paul wrote the most letters. We 
have 13 in the New Testament. I often imagine him alone in his study writing 
long theology essays.
Tim: But Paul didn’t work or write alone. In fact, he often names people from his 
team who helped him produce the letters. 
Jon: Oh right, like Timothy or Silas.1
1. 1 Thessalonians 1:1, 1 Corinthians 1:1-2, 
Philippians 1:1     2Tim: Right. Paul was constantly with his missionary teammates on the road work -
ing out ideas as they talked, debated, and taught together. Paul would have 
collected speeches, poems, and prayers in notebooks.
Jon: Like the ones he mentions in his second letter to Timothy.2
Tim: Right. Paul would get the right teammates in a room and start pulling to -
gether old and new material. Then they would hire a professional scribe and 
start creating drafts until they were satis/f.shortied with how it worked together as 
a whole.
Jon: Then mail it o/uniFB00!
Tim: Yeah. The letter was then given to a trusted teammate, who was also given 
instructions on how to perform it before the recipients.
Jon: Perform it? Like, read it aloud? 
Tim: Yeah. Most people back then didn’t read. Paul mentions more than once that 
his letters were designed to be heard,3 which is why they often sound like 
written speeches. 
Jon: So it’s important for us to read and listen to the letters from beginning to end 
too, so we can appreciate how each part contributes to the whole. 
ORGANIZATION OF A LETTER    01:46/hyphen.uc02:21
Tim: Exactly. Now every culture has its own practice for organizing a letter. In the 
/f.shortirst century, there was a standard format. The opening, which names the 
author and the receiver, then a prayer of thanks or a greeting, then the body 
of the letter.
2. 2 Timothy 4:13 3. Colossians 4:16  3Jon: This part is the main reason for writing—what the receiver is supposed to 
know or do something about.
Tim: Right, and then comes the conclusion, which can have greetings, travel 
plans, a /f.shortinal request, or a prayer. 
Jon: So it is helpful to see how a New Testament letter breaks down into these 
parts. 
Tim: Right. Take for example Paul’s letter to the Ephesians.
CASE STUDY: EPHESIANS    02:22/hyphen.uc04:21
Jon: Okay. There’s the opening and then a long thanksgiving prayer to God.4
Tim: And in the center of this opening prayer, Paul introduces the main idea of the 
whole letter. It’s about God’s plan…
Jon: “To unite together all things in heaven and earth, in the Messiah Jesus.” 5  But 
what does that mean?
Tim: Well, as we move into the body of the letter, where Paul will repeat and un -
pack this rich idea.  
Jon: Now, in the body of the letter it is easy to lose track of what Paul’s talking 
about. 
Tim: Totally. The letter to the Ephesians has about 3,000 words. 
Jon: And that’s short compared to his other letters! 
Tim: But remember, Paul wrote the letters to be heard aloud, so he usually gives 
clues to his progression of thought with transition words, like “therefore,” or 
“because of this,” or “so then.” 
4. Ephesians 1:3-14 5. Ephesians 1:10  4Jon: Okay, so the body of Ephesians breaks down to a lot of paragraphs, but they 
all begin with these transition words.
Tim: Right. And each paragraph has its own main idea. The /f.shortirst one is about how 
the risen Jesus is king of everything and everyone.6 And as for you non-Israel -
ites, God’s included you in the new humanity he is creating.7 Therefore, God’s 
one new family consists of people from all nations.8
Jon: God has uni/f.shortied a new humanity in Jesus. That’s the core idea!
Tim: Yeah, and that theme unites all the paragraphs in chapters 1 through 3. And 
when we come to chapter 4, we get a really signi/f.shorticant transition.
Jon: “Therefore.”
Tim: This transition word is actually a hinge between the /f.shortirst and second half of 
the letter. God has uni/f.shortied a new humanity in Jesus.
Jon: Therefore… what?
Tim: Great question. Let’s keep going and summarize the paragraphs of chapter 
4. God’s “one” new humanity is really diverse,9 So we must live together as 
God’s new creation,10 and that “therefore” requires that we learn how to love 
and forgive each other because we’re one.11
Jon: So this section is all about living in unity.
6. Ephesians 1:15-23
7. Ephesians 2:1-10
8. Ephesians 2:11-229. Ephesians 4:1-16
10. Ephesians 4:17-24
11. Ephesians 4:25-32  5CONCLUSION    04:22/hyphen.uc05:02
Tim: Exactly, and now you can see how all the parts of the letter /f.shortit together into 
one /f.shortlow of thought. God has uni/f.shortied a new humanity in Jesus, therefore, live 
in a way that fosters that unity. 
Jon: Seeing it broken down like this is helpful. It’s like a roadmap so I don’t get lost. 
Tim: Right. And you can read every New Testament letter this way. Break it down 
into smaller parts to see the message of each paragraph.
Jon: And then trace repeated ideas and transition words to see how they all con -
nect back together. 
Tim: Then you’ll see how the apostles brilliantly combined all the pieces into a lit -
erary whole that spoke to Jesus’ /f.shortirst followers and can still speak to us today. 