Sermon on the Mount: On Earth as It Is in Heaven
Script References
00:00-01:01 Introduction
Tim:  If you’ve ever heard of Jesus of Nazareth, you probably know he was a 
famous teacher. And his most well-known words have shaped the lives of 
billions of people throughout history.
Jon:  “Love your neighbor as yourself.” 1 “Do to others what you would have them 
do to you.” 2
Tim:  Now, those sayings come from a collection of Jesus’ teaching that’s 
sometimes called the Sermon on the Mount. It’s only three chapters long, 
but its ideas and images have endured throughout time.
Jon:  “You are the salt of the earth.” 3 “You can’t serve both God and  
money.” 4 “Take the plank out of your eye before you take the speck  
out of another’s.” 5
Tim:  In this sermon are some really challenging teachings.
Jon:  “If anyone strikes you on the cheek, turn and offer him the other cheek.” 6 
“Love your enemy and bless those who persecute you.” 7
Tim:  And there are also some really puzzling teachings.
Jon:  “If your hand causes you to sin, cut it … off?” 8
The Literary Design of the Sermon on the Mount
Tim:  But the Sermon on the Mount is not a random collection of Jesus’ 
teachings. They’ve been organized in a beautiful way so that it’s easier to 
remember and meditate on. There are three main parts of the sermon, 
the middle of which has three parts. And then each of those middle parts 
themselves have three parts.
Jon:  Wow! This sermon has been carefully designed. 1. Mark 12:31
2. Matthew 7:12
01:02-01:363. Matthew 5:13
4. Matthew 6:24
5. Matthew 7:5
6. Matthew 5:39
7. Matthew 5:44
8. Matthew 5:30Tim:  Yes. And right at the center of the center is the famous prayer that Jesus 
taught his followers.
Jon:  “Our Father in Heaven, may your name be treated as holy. May your 
Kingdom come. May your will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.” 9
God’s Kingdom in the Story of the Bible
Jon:  Well what does that mean, for God’s Kingdom to come on Earth?
Tim:  Well, we have to remember that Jesus was Jewish. And he grew up 
meditating on the Hebrew Bible, the sacred Scriptures of Israel.  
And they told the story of God and all humanity.
Jon:  How God created a well-ordered world and appointed humans to  
rule it on his behalf.10
Tim:  And when humans rule with God’s wisdom and love, and when justice and 
peace prevail and there’s enough for everyone, that is God’s Kingdom and 
God’s will being done here on Earth as it is in Heaven.
Jon:  And that’s no easy task. Humans foolishly rebel and start building their own 
kingdoms by their own wisdom.11
Tim:  And so God chose one family, the Israelites, and he offered them his 
wisdom.12 It was called the Torah, which in Hebrew means “the teaching.” 
And beginning with Moses on Mount Sinai, God entered into a sacred 
covenant with them.13
Jon:  Why only select one family?
Tim:  Well, the goal was for the Israelites to be transformed by God’s wisdom so 
that they could represent God’s Kingdom before all the nations.14
Waiting for God’s Kingdom
Jon:  But in Jesus’ day, God’s Kingdom was nowhere to be seen. In fact, Israel 
was under the thumb of Roman oppressors. So what happened? Why isn’t 
God’s Kingdom coming? 
Tim:  Well, many religious leaders, like the scribes and the Pharisees, they 
thought it wasn’t coming because Israel wasn’t being faithful enough to 
the Torah. Other leaders, called the Sadducees, thought it would be best 
if Israel found a way to cooperate with Rome, and so they became the 
power brokers of Jesus’ day.
Jon:  Some ran for the hills to become freedom fighters against Rome.
Tim:  They’re known as “the zealots.”
Jon:  And still others withdrew to the desert, waiting for God to use them to 
start a new Israel.01:37-02:37
02:38-03:379. Matthew 6:9-10
10. Genesis 1
11. Genesis 3, 4, 11
12. Genesis 12:1-8
13. Exodus 19-20
14. Exodus 19:3-6Tim:  But walk around the hill country of Israel, like Jesus did, and you’ll mostly 
find normal people figuring out their lives as best they can. Most were 
barely hanging on—lots of poor and sick people. Many had lost their land 
to the Roman occupiers and were struggling to pay the heavy taxes. 
Jon:  They were powerless and hopeless.
Jesus Announces the Kingdom’s Arrival
Tim:  And so Jesus went to these people, healing the sick and announcing that 
God’s Kingdom was arriving.15 People gathered from all over to hear his 
teachings. And one day, Jesus went up to a tall hill and said the arrival of 
God’s Kingdom was starting here and now with them. 
Jon:  You mean, with the powerless? The weak? The nobodies? God’s Kingdom 
begins here?
Tim:  Yes! This is why the very first line of the Sermon on the Mount is, “Blessed 
are the poor in spirit.” 16 In other words, where can you go and see God’s 
presence and blessings springing to life? Among the rich? Among the 
powerful? No, Jesus says. Look where people are poor, where they feel 
crushed and defeated. God’s Kingdom is beginning with the people 
standing right here.
Literary Design of Sermon on Mount and What’s Next
Jon:  The Sermon on the Mount has an intentional design. It begins with Jesus 
pronouncing several blessings on his listeners.
Tim:  And those blessings are what we’re going to look at next.15. Matthew 4:23-25
16. Matthew 5:303:38-04:30
04:59-05:09