The Art of Biblical Poetry 
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: So we’ve been learning how to read biblical narrative and showing how 
the Bible is one unified story. But thirty percent of the Bible is made up of 
ancient poetry. And I don’t know about you, but I don’t read a lot of stories 
where one out of three pages is some kind of poem.  
Tim: Yet poetry is everywhere in the Bible. Some biblical books are entirely 
poetry. Most of the Hebrew prophets wrote masterful poems, and the 
majority of God’s speech in the Bible is represented as poetry. It’s also 
very common in biblical narrative for the story to pause while a character 
breaks out in poetic song. Like in the Exodus story, there’s a narrative 
about Moses leading the Israelites through the waters of the sea, and 
that’s followed by a beautiful poem about the very same thing.
The Power of Poetry 
Jon: Why a story and a poem? Wouldn’t one version suffice?
Tim: Well, poetry has a different purpose than stories. Instead of describing the 
difference, let’s just experience it. 
Jon: Okay.
Tim: So one part of the story goes like this.
Jon: “The waters were divided, and the Israelites went through on dry land, 
with a wall of water on their right and on their left.”1  
Tim: That seems pretty clear.
Jon: Right.
Tim: Now the poem telling the same event ...00:00–00:44
00:45–01:35
1. Exodus 14:21-22Jon:  O Lord, by the blast of your nostrils 
  the waters piled up. 
 Surging waters stood like a wall; 
  deep waters congealed in the heart of the sea.2
 Woah! A wall of surging water like jello! And divine nostrils? This is intense. 
Tim: Yeah. The poem ignites your imagination through the experience of verbal 
art. And biblical poets did this with a specific set of tools, and that’s what 
we’re going to look at: the art of biblical poetry.
The Art of Biblical Poetry  
Tim: The basic unit of any poem is the line, and then many lines are designed 
together to make a poem.
Jon: Okay. I’m used to this kind of poem. There’s a meter, cadence—bum-bum-
bum-BUM, bum-bum-bum-BUM—and there’s rhyme. But poems in the 
Bible don't work like this.
Tim: Yeah. Biblical poems are what you could call free verse. They don’t use 
meter like some traditions of poetry do, and they don’t use rhyme in the 
same way either. 
Jon: So biblical poems have no order to them?
Tim: No. They just have a different kind of order. Biblical poems are most 
basically structured by couplets, two short lines that are carefully worded 
and placed beside each other. The first line makes the basic statement, 
and then the second line develops it in some way. It can do this by 
completing the thought, or deepening it with different words or images, or 
by contrasting it in some way.  
 So check out the opening of Psalm 51. You can see it in action. In the first 
couplet, the poet asks that God show grace and love, but how exactly? In 
the second line, he requests forgiveness for his failures. 
Jon: Okay. This couplet is finishing one complete thought.
Tim: Right, and then the next couplet opens with washing as a metaphor. And 
then the second line offers a more vivid image, that of a priest in the 
temple purifying things so they can be in God’s presence.
Jon: Okay, so taking an image and deepening it.
Tim: Right, and then this third couplet opens with the poet’s awareness of his 
sin, deep inside. And that’s followed by a description of the sin as being 
outside of them. It’s like it’s in public, visible to themselves and other 
people. 
Jon: So this couplet takes an idea and contrasts it.2. Exodus 15:8
01:36–04:22Tim: Exactly.
Jon: So couplets, by nature, are a bit repetitive.
Tim: But the repetitive language forces you to slow down and linger over the 
feeling and meaning of it all, looking at each idea from more than one 
angle. And then groups of couplets can come together around one key 
idea. It’s like a diamond with many facets, each line offering a different 
glimpse into the same core reality. 
Jon: So this poem is exploring what it’s like to be forgiven and offered a second 
chance. 
Tim: And that’s the kind of experience that can change a person. It’s worth 
savoring and pondering. Now, biblical poets also use repetition on a larger 
scale. In many poems you’ll find a key line that’s repeated multiple times. 
That’s called a refrain. Or they’ll open and close the poem with a similar 
couplet. That’s called an inclusio.
Jon: Ah, so biblical poets love design. 
Tim: Oh yeah. These are works of verbal artistry. These poets use repetition 
to create all kinds of elaborate patterns that invite the reader to make 
connections between different parts of the whole poem that open up even 
deeper layers of meaning. 
Conclusion  
Jon: Cool, so I’m feeling at home with ancient Hebrew poetry.
Tim: But remember, poetry isn’t something you master and then move on. 
Biblical poems are a bottomless well. They’re packed with a surplus of 
meaning for those who are willing to slow down and ponder them. 
Jon: And they are trying to pull my mind in new directions and discover new 
ideas. 
Tim: Exactly. And there’s even one more tool biblical poets have to do that very 
thing, and that’s what we’ll look at in the next video.04:23–04:50