  1Introduction
Tim: In the story of the Bible, God creates the world by 
carving order out of disorder and darkness.
Jon: Like an artist creating a place where life can flourish. 
Tim: Right! And still today, God’s ordering power is at work, preventing 
the cosmos from slipping back into chaos and nothingness. 
Jon: And in the Bible, humanity has a key role to play in this ordering work. 
Tim: But to partner with God in that ongoing ordering of the 
cosmos, we need to be mentored by Lady Wisdom.
Jon: Lady Wisdom? Who’s that?
Tim: Let’s find out in Proverbs chapter 8.
Proverbs’ Cast of Characters
Jon: So within the Hebrew Bible, there’s a scroll called 
Proverbs. It’s about gaining wisdom. 
Tim: And while most of the scroll is a collection of short 
proverbs, it first begins with nine chapters of speeches 
in which we meet a cast of symbolic characters. 
Jon: There’s the wise fatherly king and a woman named Lady Wisdom.
Tim: And they’re offering divine wisdom that leads to stability and life. 
Jon: There is also a wicked man and a wily woman called Lady Folly.
Tim: And their way of life is attractive, but it leads to disorder and death. 
Jon: Okay, so these speeches force you to make a 
choice. Whose advice will you listen to?Visual Commentary: Proverbs 8
Script References
00:00-00:40
00:41-01:35  2Tim: Right. These contrasting couples are like poetic symbols of 
the many voices out there telling us how to be human. And 
in Proverbs, they’re all competing for the attention of you, 
the reader, who is referred to throughout as “my son.”
Jon: Got it.
Lady Wisdom at the Gates
Tim: Now, all these speeches can be grouped into three main 
sections. And for now, we’re going to focus on Proverbs 
chapter 8. It’s a long speech from this majestic woman.
Jon: Lady Wisdom!
Tim: She is God’s wisdom personified. And she stands at a crossroads 
on a tall hill, inviting you to enter into God’s sacred city.
Jon: Doesn’t wisdom cry out and understanding raise her voice? 
At the road’s high point, at the crossroads she stands. Beside 
the gates going into the city, at the entrance, she shouts. 1
Tim: And then Lady Wisdom begins her speech, which has four main parts.
The Value of Wisdom
Tim: In the first part, Wisdom declares her value. 
Lady Wisdom:  Choose my instruction instead of silver, and knowledge 
rather than pure gold. For wisdom is more precious than 
pearls, and nothing you desire compares with her. 2
Tim: So living by God’s wisdom can lead to the most valuable things in 
life: healthy relationships, moral integrity, a stable, fruitful life. 
Jon: You can’t buy those things with money.
Tim: Right, and in the third part of her speech, she repeats this same idea.
Lady Wisdom: Wealth and honor are with me, enduring 
abundance and justice. My fruit is better than 
pure gold, and what I offer surpasses silver. 302:14-02:521. Proverbs 8:1-3
2. Proverbs 8:10-11
3. Proverbs 8:18-1901:36-02:13  3Wisdom in Just Leadership
Tim: Now, let’s back up to the second part of her speech where 
we learn that God’s wisdom is very practical. In fact, humans 
depend upon it every day whether they know it or not. 
Lady Wisdom: Through me kings reign, and rulers issue 
decrees that are just; through me, princes rule, 
and nobles, all who rule with justice. 4
Tim: Now, that phrase “issue decrees” comes from the Hebrew word 
khaqaq . It means literally “to carve or engrave.” It refers to how 
ancient kings would carve laws of justice onto tablets. 
Jon: So a good leader confronts disorder and injustice by creating laws that 
are just. And when they do so, they’re drawing on God’s wisdom.
Tim: Right. Wise leaders become images of the God who also creates by 
his decrees, carving order out of chaos. But God’s decrees aren’t 
written on tablets. Rather, they’re woven into the fabric of creation 
itself. In fact, that’s what the final part of Lady Wisdom’s speech is all 
about. She claims that she was there with God in the beginning.
Wisdom with God in Creation
Lady Wisdom:  Yahweh brought me forth as the firstborn of his way, 
before his deeds of old; in the remote past I was formed, 
from the beginning, from the earliest times of the land. 5
Tim: Now watch. She’s going to repeat that Hebrew word khaqaq  
to describe how God carved order into the world. 
Lady Wisdom:  When he established the skies, I was there. When he 
carved a horizon on the face of the deep waters. 6
Tim: Here, God is splitting the dark chaotic waters in 
half, making the waters above and below. 
Lady Wisdom:  And he carved a boundary for the sea, so 
the waters don’t cross his command. 7
Tim: This is God creating the boundary of the dry land, holding 
back the sea so humans can flourish in peace.
Lady Wisdom:  When he carved the foundations of the land, I was there. 802:53-03:57
03:58-05:23
5. Proverbs 8:22-23
7. Proverbs 8:29
8. Proverbs 8:296. Proverbs 8:274. Proverbs 8:18-19  4Tim: The biblical authors imagined that the dry land was supported by 
pillars below to keep it from sinking back into the chaotic sea.
Jon: So this is the three-tiered cosmos that’s described all over the Bible. 9
Tim: Right. It’s how the Israelites and all their ancient neighbors imagined 
the world. And notice, the dry land is sustained and protected 
from the surrounding chaos only by God’s wise carving abilities. 
Jon: That’s beautiful.
Tim: It is. And it’s worth celebrating, like Lady Wisdom says.
Lady Wisdom:  I was beside him, growing up. And I was his daily 
delight, celebrating before him the entire time; celebrating the 
inhabited world of the land, delighting in human beings! 10
Humanity’s Choice with Wisdom
Jon: God’s wisdom delights in the ordered universe and also in humanity. 
Tim: Yes because humans are the image of God, called to live by divine 
wisdom as they carve out their own little spots here in his world. 
Jon: But humans often reject God’s wisdom, doing 
what’s right in our own eyes. 
Tim: And in the Bible, that’s how humans drag creation back into 
chaos and darkness. It’s only when we live by God’s wisdom that 
we join his project of ordering the world, creating space and 
communities where all of God’s creatures can flourish in peace. 
Or, as Lady Wisdom puts it at the conclusion of her speech:
Lady Wisdom:  The one who finds me, finds life and receives favor 
from Yahweh; but the one who forfeits me, hurts 
themselves. Those who hate me, love death. 11
Tim: So every day, Lady Wisdom presents us with a choice. Will I live by 
God’s wisdom and contribute order, beauty, and justice to the world?
Jon: Or am I going to live selfishly by my own wisdom and pull 
creation back into the chaos from which it came? 
Tim: That’s the decision that lay before humans throughout 
the story of the Bible and still today. Which way will you 
choose? Lady Wisdom is waiting for our answer.9. Genesis 1
10. Proverbs 8:30-31
05:24-06:43
11. Proverbs 8:35-36