Sacrifice and Atonement
Script References
The Effects of Evil 
Jon: We all long for the world to be good, for people to live in peace, act with 
love and justice. But there’s a problem. Something compels us humans to 
constantly wreak havoc and destruction instead. And we call this evil. 
Tim: And from the Bible’s point of view, evil ruins things in at least two ways. 
There’s a direct effect of our evil, like when someone steals from another 
person, they’ve created injustice.
Jon: Yeah. Therefore, they owe something to make it right.
Tim: But there’s another indirect effect of evil because they’ve also ruined the 
environment of the relationship, creating a lack of trust. There’s emotional 
damage. It’s like vandalism, and they need to make that right too.
Jon: Now, many people believe, “Hey, God is good. He should be the one to 
just get rid of all the evil in the world!” 
Tim: But let’s be honest. The evil that I see everywhere out there is the same evil 
that’s inside of me. We have all contributed, and we keep doing it. 
Jon: So this kind of puts us in a bind. If God is going to rid the world of evil, he’ll 
have to get rid of us.
Tim: And this is what’s so remarkable about the story of the Bible. This God is so 
good that not only is he going to rid the world of evil, he is going to do it 
without destroying humanity.
Jon: So how is he going to do that?
The Sacrificial System 
Tim: Well, early in the story of the Bible, we’re introduced to this practice 
of animal sacrifice. Which, I know, it seems weird to us. But for the 
Israelites, it was a very powerful symbol of God’s justice and of his 00:00–01:015
01:16–02:49grace. So remember, I’m a contributor to evil that’s in the world. I should 
be removed. But God is allowing this animal’s life to be a substitute. 
It’s symbolically dying in my place. And the biblical word for this is 
“atonement,” which means to cover over someone’s debt.1  
 But there’s a second part to this ritual. Remember, evil also causes this 
relational vandalism. And in the Bible, this idea is described as polluting 
or defiling the land and making it “unclean.” So the priests would 
symbolically wash away the vandalism by sprinkling the animal’s blood in 
different parts of the temple. 
Jon: So the animal’s blood is cleaning things?
Tim: Well, remember, this is all a symbol, and it’s a symbol that we’re not 
used to. The blood represents life, and the sprinkling of the blood is this 
representation of how God is cleaning away these indirect consequences 
of evil in their community. In the Bible, this process is called purification. 
And so the temple and the land now become a clean space where God 
and his people can live together in peace.
Jon: So this ritual makes things right between Israel and God.
Tim: And more than that! The Israelites experienced God’s love and his grace 
through these symbols. And by being forgiven, ideally, this would compel 
them to become people of love and grace too.
Jon: Right. That’s the ideal, but it wasn’t always happening. 
The Prophets and Israel’s Sacrifices 
Tim: Right, so the prophet Isaiah, for example, he talks a lot about this. He 
opens his book by saying that the continual sacrifices of the Israelites had 
become meaningless because they were also allowing great evil in their 
midst, ignoring the poor and the oppressed. Even the Israelite kings  
were distorting justice.2  
 But Isaiah looked forward to a day when a new king from the line of David 
would come and deal with evil, but in a surprising way. The king would 
become a servant, and not just serve but also suffer and die for the evil 
committed by his own people. And his life would be offered as a sacrifice.3
Jesus’ Sacrifice 
Jon: And this is the promise Jesus believed he was fulfilling. He’s the king of 
Israel, suffering and dying on the cross.
Tim: In fact, Jesus himself used Isaiah’s words when he said that he came “to 
serve and give his life as a ransom for many.” 4  And that word “ransom” 
refers to a sacrifice of atonement, and so all over the New Testament, we 1. Leviticus 17:11-12
02:50–03:28
2. Isaiah 1
3. Isaiah 53: 10, 12
03:29–04:41
4. Mark 10:45hear about how Jesus’ death was an atoning sacrifice for us. It covered the 
debt that humans owe God for contributing to all of the evil and death in 
this world.5  
 But the New Testament authors also talk about Jesus' death as providing 
purification. And so we hear about Jesus’ blood, as a symbol of his life, 
having this ability to wash away the vandalism that evil has caused in us 
and around us, so we can now live at peace with God.6  
Jon: So that’s the meaning behind Jesus’ death. But there’s more to the story.
Tim: Yeah. The New Testament makes this powerful claim that Jesus’ death was 
not final. He rose from the dead. And so he’s the sacrifice who broke the 
power of death and evil, which means he lives on to offer his life to anyone 
who will accept it. He is the perfect sacrifice to which all the previous 
sacrifices were pointing all along.
Baptism and The Lord’s Supper 
Jon: So because of Jesus, the early Christians stopped participating in the ritual 
of animal sacrifice.
Tim: But they were given new rituals. There are two that Jesus taught his 
followers to perform. The first is called baptism. Just as Jesus died, so 
going into the water becomes this personal connection you now have to 
his death. And in coming out of the water, you, so to speak, come back 
to life with Jesus. So baptism is this sacred ritual that joins your story to 
Jesus’ death and his resurrection.
 The second ritual is called the Lord’s Supper, which is a reenactment of 
Jesus’ last meal with his disciples. And he used bread and wine to portray 
his coming death as a sacrifice. And so now followers of Jesus they take 
the bread and cup regularly to remember and to participate in the power 
of Jesus’ death and in his life.
Jon: So these rituals, they remind us of God’s love and encourage us to live a 
life of love and grace.
Tim: But they do more than that. They connect us to a new life source. The very 
power that brought Jesus back from the dead is the same power that can 
deal with the evil in our own lives and transform us into people who lead 
lives of love and peace. 5. Ephesians 1:7, 
Romans 3:25, 
1 Peter 1:18-19
6. Hebrews 9:14, 
1 John 1:7
04:42–05:59