Shema: Listen
Script References
Introduction
For thousands of years, every morning and evening, Jewish people have 
prayed these well-known words as a way of expressing their devotion to God, 
they’re called the Shema. 
“Hear O Israel, the LORD is our God, the LORD is one, and as for you, you shall 
love the LORD your God with all of your heart, with all your soul, and with all 
your strength.” 1
Now the first word of the Shema is “hear,” or “listen,” which in Hebrew is 
pronounced shema . That’s where the prayer gets its name.
To Listen
Now shema  is a really common word in the Hebrew Bible, and it’s obvious  
why. Hearing is a very universal activity. It’s usually connected with the ear,  
as in Proverbs 20:12. “Ears that shema  and eyes that see, the LORD has made 
them both.” 2
Now that seems basic enough, but if you look at the other ways that Hebrew 
authors can use the word shema , they use it to mean more than just let sound 
waves enter your ear.
In Hebrew, shema  can also mean pay attention to or focus on. So when Leah, 
who wasn’t loved by her husband Jacob, she has a son and she names him 
Simon, or in Hebrew, Shim’on . Because, she says, “The LORD has shema  that I 
am unloved.” 300:00-00:25
00:26-01:101. Deuteronomy 6:4-5
2. Proverbs 20:12
3. Genesis 29:33To Respond
So shema  means to hear and to pay attention to. And even more, it can also 
mean responding to what you hear. 
This is why so many of the cries for help in the book of Psalms begin with a call 
that God listen. Psalm 27:7: “ Shema  my voice, when I call O LORD, be merciful, 
answer me.” So asking God to shema  is at the same time asking God to act, to 
do something.
It’s similar to when God asks people to listen. Like when the people of Israel 
come to Mount Sinai, God says, “If you shema  me fully and keep my covenant, 
then out of all the nations you will be my treasured possession.” 4
Now there’s a couple interesting things about this verse in Exodus. In Hebrew 
the word shema  is repeated twice in this sentence to give it emphasis, “if you 
shema  shema ,” meaning listen closely.
But also notice that from God’s point of view, listening is basically the same as 
keeping the covenant. So when God asks the people to shema , what he means 
is that they listen and obey. 
And that’s the last fascinating thing about shema . In ancient Hebrew, there is 
no separate word for obey, meaning to carry out the wishes of someone who 
knows better than you or is an authority over you. So in the Bible, if you want 
to say, “I will listen and do what you say,” you use the single word shema . In 
Hebrew, listening and doing are two sides of the same coin.  
This is why, later in Israel’s history when the people were breaking their 
covenant promises to God, the Hebrew prophets would say things like, “They 
have ears, but they’re not listening.” 5 The Israelites of course could hear just 
fine, but they weren’t actually listening, or else they would act differently. 
And so in the end, listening in the Bible is about giving respect to the one 
speaking to you and doing what they say. Real listening takes effort and action. 
And that’s the Hebrew word shema .4. Exodus 19:4
5. Jeremiah 5:2101:11-03:05