The Books of Solomon
Script References
Introduction 
Jon: In the story of the Bible, King Solomon was the wisest ruler that Israel ever 
had. 
Tim: And there are three books in the Hebrew Scriptures connected to him: 
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs. They pass down the legacy 
of Solomon’s wisdom but in a surprising way. 
Jon: So let’s talk about how to read the books of Solomon.
Wisdom and the Garden of Eden 
Tim: Okay. To really appreciate the story of Solomon’s wisdom, we have to go 
back to the garden of Eden. 
Jon: Where God created humanity, male and female.1  
Tim: Right. Adam and Eve. And God commissions them to rule the world 
together in intimacy and love.
Jon: Kings and queens of creation. Now in order to rule, you need to be wise, 
and the humans have a choice about how to gain wisdom. 
Tim: Yeah. They could live by God’s wisdom, which will lead to life, or they 
could become wise in their own eyes. 
Jon: And that’s what they choose—to take the knowledge of good and bad into 
their own hands.2  
Tim: And immediately the intimacy between man and woman is broken. They 
hide their bodies from each other and then from God. 
Jon: Their choice leads to division and death. 
Tim: But the story holds out hope for a future human who will make the right 
choice and rely on God’s wisdom. 00:00–00:18
00:19–01:50
1. Genesis 1:26-27
2. Genesis 3Jon: Like King Solomon! He prayed that God would give him the knowledge to 
know good from bad, so he could rule with true wisdom.3  
Tim: Exactly. He reverses the failure of Adam and Eve, and it leads to 
abundance. In Solomon’s day, every Israelite sat in peace under their own 
fruit tree.
Jon: Oh, it’s like he’s creating Eden!
Tim: Well for a while, but then Solomon fails. He marries hundreds of women 
from other nations, and he’s deceived to follow their gods.4  
Jon: And this begins Israel’s long descent into self-destruction.
Tim: And so when we turn to the books of Solomon, we’re invited to learn 
wisdom from his successes and his failures. 
Proverbs 
Jon: Got it. So let’s start with Proverbs. 
Tim: Okay, so the book of Proverbs is most well-known for the hundreds of 
short, memorable sayings that teach us how to live by God’s wisdom.
Jon: Like, “Trust in the Lord with all your heart, and don’t be wise in your own 
eyes.” 5 
Tim: In Proverbs, living by God’s wisdom instead of your own is called “the fear 
of the Lord,” like in the book’s opening paragraph. “The fear of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom.”6  
Jon: Now, Proverbs isn’t just memorable sayings. It actually begins with a lot of 
poetry.
Tim: Yes. Nine chapters of speeches from Solomon to his royal sons. He tells 
them to pursue God’s wisdom, which is symbolized as an elegant woman.
Jon: Wisdom is a woman?
Tim: Yes! So remember in the garden of Eden, the man and the woman’s 
intimacy was violated by their failed search for wisdom. But now in 
Proverbs, humans who reunite with God’s wisdom become what Adam 
and Eve failed to be, wise human rulers. Proverbs 3 even says that when 
we embrace Lady Wisdom, we are taking hold of the tree of life.7  
Jon: Now we’re the ones in the garden.
Tim: Exactly. Proverbs is saying that every day we all stand before the tree with 
our own choice to make. And Solomon urges us, choose wisdom and life. 3. 1 Kings 3
4. 1 Kings 11
01:51–03:06
5. Proverbs 3:5-7
6. Proverbs 1:7
7. Proverbs 3:18Ecclesiastes 
Jon: Got it. So how does Ecclesiastes fit into Solomon’s story?
Tim: Well in this book, it’s like we are meeting Solomon near the end of his life, 
and he offers some sober reflections. 
Jon: Life is hevel.
Tim: That’s the Hebrew word for “vapor,” or “smoke,” which is unpredictable and 
uncontrollable. And he’s constantly talking about life “under the sun,” that 
is, life outside of the garden—how it’s confusing and difficult.
Jon: Right. Even when I live by God’s wisdom, life can be full of 
disappointments. 
Tim: Leading up to the ultimate disappointment: your own death. 
Jon: That’s depressing.
Tim: But at the end of the book, he says we should strive to live by wisdom and 
the fear of the Lord just with more realistic expectations. 
Song of Solomon 
Jon: Got it. Well maybe the next book will cheer us up: the Song of Songs, a 
love poem between a man and woman. And it’ll make you blush.
Tim: Yeah. On its basic level of meaning this book is racy Hebrew love poetry. 
But remember in Proverbs, humanity’s pursuit of wisdom was portrayed 
with the symbolism of a man pursuing a woman in a garden. 
Jon: But in this song it’s the woman who’s searching and longing for her lover.
Tim: Yes! It’s a poetic image of Lady Wisdom pursuing us so that we can have 
life. In fact, the song ends with a poem about how this lady’s love is more 
powerful than death itself. 
Jon: So the song works on two levels. It’s celebrating human’s desire for 
intimacy.
Tim: And saying that that desire points to humanity’s ultimate purpose: to be 
united with God and his wisdom. 
Jon: So we can rule united with each other. 
Tim: Exactly. This is why the song ends with the man and the woman united in 
love under a fruit tree.
Jon: So the story of Solomon and these three books invite us to see ourselves 
within the whole biblical story. 
Tim: Yes. They’re about how God designed all of us to rule the world by his 
wisdom so that we can all find true life. 03:07–04:49
04:50–05:09