The Royal Priest: The Royal Priesthood 
Script References
00:00-00:56 Introduction
Jon:  The Bible introduces humanity as God’s royal priests, ruling with God in 
Eden—a place full of life and abundance and God’s blessing.1 
Tim:  But humanity was deceived by evil and then exiled from Eden. And so 
humans forfeited their calling as the royal priesthood.2 
Jon:  But God promised that one of their descendants would be an even better 
priest, who will defeat evil and intervene on their behalf to restore the 
blessings of Eden.3 
Tim:  This descendant would be a royal priest like Melchizedek, that Abraham 
met in Jerusalem,4 and also like Moses and the priestly figure he saw on 
Mount Sinai.5 This descendant will also be like David and the priest king 
that David called “my Lord” in Psalm 110. And all of these figures lead us to 
Jesus, the ultimate royal priest who suffered and died for a failed humanity 
so that they could be restored to their original calling as royal priests. 
Pentecost and Mini Temples
Jon:  About a month after the resurrection of Jesus, his disciples see him ascend 
into the skies.6 
Tim:  Yeah. This was the fulfillment of Israel’s hopes and of the story of Jesus. 
He was exalted into the heavenly temple of God’s presence and installed 
there as the cosmic royal priest.
Jon:  Now, Jesus also told his followers to wait for God’s presence to come and 
guide them into the future.7 
Tim:  And so during Pentecost, a festival in Jerusalem, God’s Spirit comes 
down on them like they are each mini temples who are filled with God’s 
presence.8
Jon:  Mini temples? 1. Genesis 1-2
2. Genesis 3
3. Genesis 3:15
00:57-02:074. Genesis 14:18-20
5. Exodus 28
8. Acts 2:1-46. Acts 1:9
7. Acts 1:4Tim:  Yeah. Just like God took up residence in the tabernacle and later the 
temple, now God dwells among the followers of Jesus, and their bodies 
are the temple. The apostle Peter, who was there that day, later put it this 
way: “You all are living stones, built up as a spiritual house ... You all are a 
royal priesthood.” 9
Jon:  So they are, all together, God’s temple!
Tim:  And they’re also the priests, reclaiming that lost calling that God gave 
humanity to represent him and to rule the world on his behalf. The Spirit is 
restoring the life and blessing of Eden to the people of Jesus. 
The Royal Priesthood
Jon:  But these people aren’t priests. They’re merchants and fishermen,  
soldiers and slaves, tax collectors and the poor. They work in the  
world not in temples.
Tim:  And yet they talked and behaved as if they were priests. They believed 
Jesus was the cosmic royal priest ruling all of Heaven and Earth as his 
temple, and they saw themselves as an extension of Jesus here on Earth, 
that is, “the body of the Messiah.” 10
Jon:  That’s a beautiful image, but what does it actually look like?
Tim:  Well, if you went to the temple in Jerusalem, you would hear the priestly 
choirs singing poetry that honored God and that told the story of his love. 
Music was a bridge between Heaven and Earth. 
Jon:  Ah, so the followers of Jesus started writing and singing new songs about 
Jesus as part of their priestly calling.11 
Tim:  Right. Priests also surrendered everything over to God through their 
sacrifices. And so followers of Jesus started giving themselves—their time 
and their money and energy—to serve those in need. And they said, “these 
are the sacrifices that bring pleasure to God.” 12
Jon:  Priests also intercede on behalf of others through blessings and prayers, 
advocating for the needs of everyone. 
Tim:  Yeah. This is why the apostle Paul called on the Christians living in Rome to 
all together offer their bodies as one single living sacrifice.13 
Jon:  A living sacrifice?
Tim:  Yeah! Jesus offered his life in the ultimate act of love, and so they too were 
to surrender themselves to each other and to those who needed their 
help. This is the royal priesthood Jesus-style. 
Jon:  When people imitate Jesus the royal priest, they become a new humanity, 
living in a way that reunites Heaven and Earth. 10. 1 Corinthians 12:2702:08-03:519. 1 Peter 2:5, 9
11. Ephesians 5:19
12. Hebrews 13:16
13. Romans 12God’s Royal Priest in the New Heaven and Earth
Tim:  Exactly. And now you can see how the whole Bible is one unified story 
about a royal priestly humanity that lost its way.
Jon:  But then how God promised to raise up a priest who would give his life to 
restore us.
Tim:  And then how the stories of Abraham, and Moses, and David all point 
forward to a promised priest king.
Jon:  And how this all led to Jesus, our great high priest who suffered on our 
behalf to restore us to our calling.
Tim:  And so this is why, on the final pages of the Bible, there’s a vision of a 
renewed and reunited Heaven and Earth with humans serving and ruling 
as God’s royal priests forever.14 14. Revelation 21-2203:52-04:32