The New Humanity
Script References
Humanity 
Jon: In the story of the Bible, there are two realms, the Earth where we live, and 
the Heavens where God lives. 
Tim: And we’ve been talking about the spiritual beings—the Elohim, the divine 
council, angels and cherubim, the Satan and demons. And the last 
character we want to focus on is humanity.
Jon: Now, humans aren’t spiritual beings. In Genesis 1 and 2, they’re made of 
the dirt like the animals.
Tim: But notice that God calls humans to become something more. He elevates 
them to live and rule in Eden, the place where Heaven and Earth are one, 
and they’re invited to eat from the tree of life.1  
Jon: Yeah. What does that mean, to eat of the tree of life? 
Tim: Well, it’s an image of receiving God’s own eternal life into yourself. It’s 
about a whole new kind of existence. 
Jon: So wait. Physical beings living forever? How could that even work?
Tim: Well, somehow sharing in God’s life transforms our bodies so that we can 
inhabit Heaven and Earth at the same time. And it also transforms our 
imaginations so that we learn how to rule the world like God in the power 
of love. 
Jon: This is an amazing calling! But humanity is quickly deceived by a spiritual 
rebel.2 
Tim: Yes. He lies to the humans, saying that they can rule and get eternal life on 
their own terms. And God exiled all of them from the garden.3  
Jon: They’re cut off from the source of true life. Evil and death now have power 
over us, and we live in a world of fear, self-preservation, and violence. 00:00–01:40
1. Genesis 2:7-9, 15, 16-17
2. Genesis 3:17-19
3. Genesis 3:22-24Tim: But God promises that one day a human will come to defeat evil and death 
at their source and to open up the way to a reunited Heaven and Earth. 
And this promise reaches its fulfillment in Jesus. 
God and Humanity Become One in Jesus 
Jon: Right. When we’re introduced to Jesus, he’s a human, but he’s also way 
more. 
Tim: Yeah. We’re told that, in Jesus, God and humanity have become one so 
that he can restore the rest of humanity to its lost calling. 
Jon: And Jesus was tested by that same deceptive spiritual being, not in a 
garden but out in the wilderness.
Tim: Yeah. It tells Jesus the same lie: “You could rule the whole world right now 
if you come under my authority and do things my way.”4  
Jon: But Jesus knew that that lie leads to death, so he rejected it and was 
victorious over the spiritual power of evil.
Tim: And so then Jesus started announcing that God’s heavenly rule was 
arriving here on Earth, through him. And so he went around confronting 
the power of death in his healings and his exorcisms.5  
Jon: Jesus was opening the way back to eternal life, to rule with God and 
become new humans.
Tim: Yes. He also confronted our imaginations by teaching how corrupt 
spiritual powers enslave whole communities with their lies.
Jon: Lies like “my tribe is superior to your tribe.”
Tim: But Jesus said that every human is an image of God. 
Jon: Or the lie that power comes through force.
Tim: While Jesus taught that real power requires sacrifice and generosity.
Jon: Or the lie that peace comes through violence.
Tim: While he said that true peace comes through self-giving love.
The New Humanity 
Jon: This is a new kind of humanity. 
Tim: Yeah, a humanity transformed by God’s life and his love. 
Jon: And Jesus didn’t just talk about these ideals, he lived them out.
Tim: Yeah, exactly. He brought God’s heavenly Kingdom to Jerusalem to 
confront the powers. In fact, that’s what got him arrested.01:41–03:00
4. Luke 4:1-13
5. Matthew 4:23-24; 
Luke 13:10-13, 16; 
Matthew 12:22-29
03:01–04:46Jon: Well, so maybe the way of Jesus can’t win over evil. 
Tim: But from Jesus’ point of view, his coming death was actually a battle. 
Jon: A battle?
Tim: Yeah, not against humans but against the real enemy, the spiritual powers 
that enslave us through their lies. Jesus gave his life and let evil do its 
worst. But God’s love has the power to create life even out of death. That’s 
what happened when Jesus rose from the dead. 
Jon: And the risen Jesus is human but a new kind of human.6  
Tim: Yeah. When Jesus’ followers met him alive from the dead, he had a 
transformed body that could live in Heaven and Earth at the same time. 
He’s like a new category of human, one that can live and rule with God 
forever. 
Jon: Jesus is the new humanity that we're called to become.
Tim: Right. He said that all authority in Heaven and Earth belongs to him, and 
then he sent out his followers to announce that his eternal life is available 
to us now in the present.7  
Jon: We can experience eternal life now?
Tim: Well, Jesus said that eternal life is knowing this God of love so that our 
imaginations can be transformed as we’re liberated to love God and 
to love our neighbor. And we trust that even if we die, God’s love will 
transform our bodies and raise us up into the new creation. 
Jon: And that’s how the story of the Bible ends.
Tim: Yeah. The ending is a new beginning, with Jesus and the new humanity 
ruling in a united Heaven and Earth together.8  6. 1 Corinthians 15:20-27, 
35-57
7. Matthew 28:18-20
8. Revelation 21:1-3, 22:1-5