Advent: Hope
Script References
Introduction  
So let’s say you want to describe the feeling of anticipating a future that’s 
better than the present. You might be giddy or excited or maybe unsure, but 
most of us know that experience. We call it hope. It’s a state of anticipation, 
and it’s crucial for healthy human existence, and it’s a really important concept 
in the Bible. In fact, there are many words for hope in the ancient languages of 
the Bible, and they’re all fascinating.
In the Old Testament, there are two main Hebrew words translated as hope. 
The first is yakhal, which means simply “to wait for.” Like in the story of Noah 
and the ark, as the flood waters recede, Noah had to yakhal for weeks.1  
The other Hebrew word is qavah, which also means to wait. It’s related to the 
Hebrew word qav , which means cord. When you pull a qav  tight, you produce 
a state of tension until there’s release. That’s qavah, the feeling of tension 
and expectation while you wait for something to happen. The prophet Isaiah 
depicts God as a farmer who plants vines and qavahs for good grapes.2  Or the 
prophet Micah talks about farmers who both qavah and yakhal for morning 
dew to give moisture to the land.3
Hope in the Old Testament  
So in biblical Hebrew, hope is about waiting or expectation, but waiting for 
what? In the period of Israel’s prophets, as the nation was sinking into self-
destruction, Isaiah said, “At this moment, the Lord’s hiding his face from Israel, 
so I will qavah for him.”4  The only hope Isaiah had in those dark days was the 
hope for God himself.
You find this same notion of hope all over the book of Psalms where these 
words appear over forty times. In almost every case, what people are waiting 
for is God. Like in Psalm 130, the poet cries out from a pit of despair, “I qavah  
for the Lord ... Let Israel yakhal for the Lord, because he’s loyal and will redeem 
Israel from its sins.”5  00:00–01:05
1. Genesis 8:6-12
2. Isaiah 28:24-29
3. Micah 5:7
01:06–01:46
4. Isaiah 8:17
5. Psalm 130:5-8Biblical Hope  
Biblical hope is based on a person, which makes it different from optimism. 
Optimism is about choosing to see, in any situation, how circumstances could 
work out for the best. But biblical hope isn’t focused on circumstances. In fact, 
hopeful people in the Bible often recognize there’s no evidence things will get 
better, but you choose hope anyway. 
Like the prophet Hosea, he lived in a dark time when Israel was being 
oppressed by foreign empires. And he chose hope when he said God could 
turn this “valley of trouble into a door of hope,” like the day when Israel came 
up from the land of Egypt.6  God had surprised his people with redemption 
back in the days of the Exodus, and he could do so again. 
So it’s God’s past faithfulness that motivates hope for the future. You look 
forward by looking backward, trusting in nothing other than God’s character. 
It’s like the poet of Psalm 39 who says, “And now O Lord, what else can I qavah  
for? You are my yakhal.” 7
Jesus as Living Hope  
In the New Testament, the earliest followers of Jesus cultivated this similar 
habit of hope. They believed that Jesus’ life, death, and resurrection was God’s 
surprising response to our slavery to evil and death. The empty tomb opened 
up a new door of hope, and they used the Greek word elpis to describe this 
anticipation.  
The apostle Peter said that Jesus’ resurrection opened up a  “living hope” that 
people can be reborn to become new and different kinds of humans.8  More 
than once, the apostle Paul says the good news about Jesus announces “the 
elpis of glory.”9  In both cases, this elpis is based on a person, the risen Jesus, 
who has overcome death.
And this hope wasn’t just for humans. The apostles believed that what 
happened to Jesus in the resurrection was a foretaste of what God had 
planned for the whole universe. In Paul’s words, it’s a “hope that creation itself 
will be liberated from slavery to corruption into freedom when God’s children 
are glorified.”10
Conclusion  
So Christian hope is bold, waiting for humanity and the whole universe to be 
rescued from evil and death. And some would say it’s crazy, and maybe it is. 
But biblical hope isn’t optimism based on the odds. It’s a choice to wait for God 
to bring about a future that’s as surprising as a crucified man rising from the 
dead. Christian hope looks back to the risen Jesus in order to look forward, and 
so we wait. And that’s what the biblical words for hope are all about.01:47–02:42
6. Hosea 2:15
7. Psalm 39:7
02:43–03:38
8. 1 Peter 1:3
9. Romans 5:2;  
 Colossians 1:27
10. Romans 8:21
03:39–04:10