Sermon on the Mount: A Surprising New World
Script References
00:00-00:30 Introduction
Tim:  Two thousand years ago, on the eastern side of the Mediterranean Sea, a 
teacher named Jesus of Nazareth went up onto a hillside and addressed a 
large crowd.
Jon:  It was a crowd of nobodies—poor and sick people, their land occupied by 
the Roman Empire who charged heavy taxes. This is a ragtag group.
Tim:  And while they don’t look like much, Jesus claimed that something 
surprising was starting with them.
The Kingdom of the Skies
Jon:  So he opened his mouth and said, “Blessed are the poor in spirit,  
for theirs is the Kingdom of the skies.” 1 The Kingdom of the skies?  
What does that mean?
Tim:  Well, Jesus uses this phrase to talk about a new kind of reality. From our 
perspective, we see a world of violence and corruption where might 
makes right. But for Jesus, there is a realm where generosity reigns, where 
there’s justice and peace. It's a world where love is the final word.
Jon:  And that reality might as well be up in the skies. It’s beyond us. 
Tim:  Exactly! It’s God’s heavenly reality, which might seem far off. But Jesus was 
claiming that Heaven was coming to Earth right here and now, beginning 
with these people. 
Jon:  That’s unexpected. 
Tim:  And so is what he says next.1. Matt. 5:300:31-01:19The Grieving and Unimportant Will Rule the World
Jon:  “Blessed are those who grieve, for they will be comforted.” 2
Tim:  So this group that’s at the bottom of society, they know all about loss  
and grief. But Jesus said something’s coming that’s going to turn  
sorrow into joy. 
Jon:  And then he said, “Blessed are the unimportant, for they will inherit  
the land.” 3
Tim:  And these people are not powerful or important. But just wait, Jesus says, 
because one day, it will be you all who are ruling the world.
Jon:  You know, it kind of sounds like Jesus is trying to start a revolution.
Tim:  Well, kind of. But it’s not a revolution for those who are hungry for  
power or influence. This is a movement of people who are going to 
serve because they long for healthy relationships between people and 
communities and nations.
The Merciful and Pure-in-Heart Peacemakers
Jon:  Yeah. As Jesus puts it next, “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for 
righteousness, for they will be satisfied. Blessed are the merciful, for they 
will be shown mercy.” 4
Tim:  Just imagine it: a group of powerless nobodies ruling the world through 
generosity, and forgiveness, and justice. This is a Jesus-style revolution. 
Jon:  The next thing Jesus says is, “Blessed are the pure in heart, for they will see 
God.” 5 And this one really raises the bar. To be part of this revolution, my 
heart needs to be so pure I could look directly at God? 
Tim:  Well, Jesus knows that all of our choices, even our good ones, are often 
driven by mixed motives. For Jesus, real peace is only possible through 
people who know that they need to be transformed if they’re going to truly 
love God and others. 
Jon:  And this sounds wonderful, but it’s a radical calling.
Tim:  That’s exactly right. In fact, Jesus goes on to explore just how radical it is. 
Jon:  “Blessed are the peacemakers, for they will be called children of God.” 6
Tim:  So God’s new reality won’t just happen by itself. It requires people who are 
willing to enter into the conflicts of others, urging and helping create a 
way toward peace. 01:20-02:04
02:05-03:18
5. Matt. 5:8
6. Matt. 5:92. Matt. 5:4
3. Matt. 5:5
4. Matt. 5:6-7Persecuted Peacemakers Like Israel’s Prophets
Jon:  But that way of life can be dangerous. And so Jesus says, “Blessed are 
those who are persecuted because of righteousness, for theirs is the 
Kingdom of the skies.” 7
Tim:  Yeah. Entering into conflicts and advocating for peace—that’s not a 
comfortable way to live. And so Jesus calls people to this peacemaking 
revolution, and he names the high cost.
Jon:  “Blessed are you when people revile you and persecute you and utter all 
kinds of evil against you falsely on my account. Rejoice and be glad, for 
your reward in the skies is great, for they persecuted the prophets who 
were before you in the same way.” 8
Jon:  What does that mean, “the prophets before you”?
Tim:  Well, Jesus and this whole crowd are Israelites. And in their Hebrew 
Scriptures, God promised that it would be through Israel that his Kingdom 
would be restored over all the world.9
Jon:  But as the story goes, Israel becomes as corrupt and violent as everyone 
else, and they end up enslaved to oppressive nations.10
Tim:  But Israel’s prophets stood up to these kingdoms and criticized their 
corruption. They said that one day, God’s heavenly Kingdom would 
break in, starting with a small group of Israelites who would be willing to 
surrender everything over to God.11
Jon:  So Jesus wants this crowd to see that they’re part of that legacy.
Tim:  Yes, and that’s why Jesus concludes this first block of teaching with three 
images from their Scriptures. 
The Salt, Light, and City
Jon:  The first is: “You are the salt of the land.”12
Tim:  Salt is a mineral that preserves food for a long time. And in the Bible, salt 
is used as a symbol of God’s long-lasting covenant with Israel.13 Jesus is 
saying that he and this ragtag group are the launch party of God’s long-
lasting ancient promises to renew the world.
Jon:  And then Jesus says, “You are the light of the world,” and “a city on a hill 
cannot be hidden.” 1411. Isa. 10:20-22;  
Zeph. 3:11-13
12. Matt. 5:1303:19-04:40
04:41-05:407. Matt. 5:10
8. Matt. 5:11-12
9. Gen. 12:1-3; Isa. 55:1-5
10. 2 Kgs. 25:1-12
13. Lev. 2:13; Num. 18:19; 
2 Chron. 13:5
14. Matt. 5:14Tim:  He’s referring to the biblical image of God’s light, his presence  
shining out from its dwelling place in the temple in Jerusalem,  
which was a city on a hill.
Jon:  But these people, they aren't the rulers. I mean, they don’t even  
live in Jerusalem!
Tim:  And yet, “surprise!” Jesus says. You all are God’s salt and city and light.  
You all are the blessed ones, the new Jerusalem that’s going to display 
God’s Kingdom to all the world.