Advent: Agape / Love
Script References
Introduction
So if you’ve heard of Jesus, you probably know about one of his famous 
teachings called the Golden Rule. “Do to others what you would want them 
to do to you.” 1 And this actually is a restatement of something else Jesus said, 
that the meaning of life is to love God and love your neighbor as yourself.2
Now that’s really beautiful, but what does he mean, exactly, by the word “love”? 
It’s an unclear word in English because you can love your mom and you can 
love pizza. And if the word love means the same thing in both of those cases, 
your mom’s going to feel real bad. 
Jesus’ Concept of Love
So what did Jesus mean in his language? Well, first of all, this “love your 
neighbor” phrase is a quotation from the Hebrew Scriptures, where the word 
for love is " ahavah ." However, the language Jesus spoke and taught in from day-
to-day, it was a cousin language of Hebrew, that is, Aramaic, in which the word 
for love is " rakhmah ." But then, as Jesus’ followers spread his teachings around 
the world, they translated them into Greek using the word " agape ."
But here’s what’s fascinating. The earliest followers of Jesus, who wrote books 
of the New Testament in Greek, they didn’t learn the meaning of agape  by 
looking it up in ancient dictionaries. Rather, they looked to the teachings of 
Jesus and the story of his life to redefine their very concept of love. 
So one time, Jesus was asked about the most important command in the 
Jewish Scriptures. And he first quoted from the ancient prayer in the Torah 
called the Shema . “Love the Lord your God with all your heart.” 3 So love for 
God is the most important thing, but then Jesus quickly followed up, saying 
another command from the Torah was also the most important—to love your 
neighbor as yourself.400:00-00:31
00:32-02:411. Luke 6:31
2. Mark 12:31
3. Deuteronomy 6:5
4. Leviticus 19:18So which is the most important? Loving God or loving your neighbor? Jesus’ 
answer is yes. To ask the question means you don’t get his point. For Jesus, 
they’re two sides of the same coin. Your love for God will be expressed by your 
love for people and vice versa. They’re inseparable. 
And so this makes it clear that, for Jesus, agape  love is not primarily a feeling 
for someone else that happens to you, like our phrase “I fell in love.” For Jesus, 
love is action. It’s a choice that you make to seek the well-being of people other 
than yourself. 
Jesus also went on to teach that genuine love for God and others means 
seeking people’s well-being without expecting anything in return, especially 
from people who are in difficult situations who can’t repay you even if they 
wanted to. According to Jesus, this kind of generous love reflects the very 
heartbeat of God. 
And he took this even further. Jesus said that the ultimate standard of authentic 
love is how well you treat the person that you can’t stand, or in his words, “You 
shall love your enemy and do good to them, expecting nothing in return.” 5 For 
Jesus, this kind of enemy-embracing love imitates the very character of God 
himself. 
Love Through Action 
Now, we wouldn’t be talking about Jesus still today if he had only said things 
like love your enemy. This is how he actually lived. Jesus was constantly helping 
and serving the people around him in very practical and tangible ways. And he 
consistently moved towards poor and hurting people who couldn’t benefit him 
in return. He showed love for the forgotten ones, the people who usually fall 
through the cracks. 
And when Jesus eventually marched into Jerusalem, he made himself an 
enemy of the leaders of his people by accusing them of hypocrisy and 
corruption. But then, instead of attacking his enemies to overthrow them, he 
allowed them to kill him. Jesus died for the selfishness and corruption of his 
enemies because he loved them. 
After Easter morning, Jesus, and then his followers, claimed that it was the 
power of God’s love for the world that was revealed in Jesus’ life, death, and 
resurrection. As the apostle Paul put it, “God demonstrated his own agape  for 
us in this, while we were still sinners, the Messiah died for us.” 6
Or in the words of the apostle John, “God’s own agape  was revealed when he 
sent his one and only Son into the world, so that through him, we could have 
life.” 7 And for John then, this leads naturally to the conclusion, “Beloved ones, if 
that’s how God loved us, then we ought to show love for one another.” 85. Luke 6:35
02:42-04:24
6. Romans 5:8
7. 1 John 4:9
8. 1 John 4:11So Christian faith involves trusting that at the center of the universe is a being 
overflowing with love for his world, which means that the purpose of human 
existence is to receive this love that has come to us in Jesus and then to give it 
back out to others, creating an ecosystem of others-focused, self-giving love. 
And that’s the New Testament meaning of agape  love. 