Anointing
Script References
00:00-00:41 Introduction
There's a ritual in the Bible involving fragrant plants and spices that make  
a rich oil to pour on special objects or people. This is called anointing oil. 
And its meaning is rooted in the story of the garden of Eden, where  
God provided water for the dry land and formed the human, filling him  
with his Spirit.1
This is the first anointing.
The oil is a liquid symbol. It’s the water of life and God’s Spirit combined 
together, used to mark a person or a place as a bridge between  
Heaven and Earth. 
Anointing in the Hebrew Bible
During his wilderness exile, Jacob had a dream. 
He sees a stairway leading up to Heaven. When he wakes, he anoints the stone 
on which he slept and called the place “House of God,” a place where Heaven 
and Earth are one.2
The Israelites built the tabernacle in the wilderness. When it was completed, 
they anointed the tent with oil, marking it as a place where God’s heavenly 
presence has come down to Earth.3
Israel’s priests and their kings were anointed with oil to set them apart as 
leaders, to mediate God’s heavenly wisdom to the world.4 But they rejected 
God’s wisdom. They led with violence, leading to ruin and exile. 1. Genesis 2:4-14
00:42-01:30
2. Genesis 28:10-19
3. Exodus 40:9-11
4. Exodus 40:12-14;  
1 Samuel 16:13;  
2 Kings 23:30The Anointed One
Their failure created hope for the ultimate anointed one, one anointed not 
merely with oil but with water and Spirit—not merely a bridge to Heaven, but 
Heaven itself come to Earth.
This is Jesus Christ.5
More than a name, “christ” is a title. It means “anointed one,” the new human, 
the ultimate priest, the cosmic king, God’s heavenly life coming into our world 
in a new way—a surprising way.
And after Jesus rose from the dead, he spread his anointing out into the world 
through his followers, Christians, from the word "christ," anointed ones who 
follow the Anointed One, people marked by God’s Spirit so that more and more 
of Earth can be filled with the life of Heaven. 01:31-02:42
5. Mark 1:1