Blessing and Curse
Script References
00:00-00:35 Introduction
Tim:  The story of the Bible begins with God bringing life out of darkness, 
ordering our beautiful world and then blessing all of its creatures.1
Jon:  Hold on. Blessing. That’s one of those funny religious words.
Tim:  Yeah right. People say a blessing over their meal or after they sneeze.
Jon:  Or just a general way to say that things are going well for me.
Tim:  But in the Bible, a blessing is more specific. The first blessing in the Bible is 
when God creates animals. “And he blessed them, saying, ‘Be fruitful and 
multiply and fill the land.’” 2
Jon:  Ah, so God’s blessing is about flourishing and multiplication of life.
Tim:  Right. It’s when God shares his life-producing ability with others.
Blessing and Curse
Tim:  Next, God gives humans an additional blessing that sets them apart from 
the animals. Not only are we one of God’s creatures that can generate new 
life, we’ve also been appointed as God’s representative image to rule and 
oversee this whole flourishing world on God’s behalf.3
Jon:  So part of our blessing is to take care of God’s blessing for all creation.
Tim:  And God wants us to rule while trusting in his abundance, to eat from the 
tree of blessing, that is, the tree of God’s own eternal life.
Jon:  Now, there is another tree to eat from.
Tim:  Yes, and it represents this decision to try and seize abundance and life on 
our own terms, by our own wisdom.1. Genesis 1:21, 
Genesis 1:26-28, 
Genesis 2:1-31 
00:36-02:142. Genesis 1:28
3. Genesis 1:26-27 Jon:  The humans encounter a deceptive creature, who tricks them into eating 
from this other tree, thinking it’s a shortcut to blessing.4
Tim:  And instead of blessing, this tree brings a curse.
Jon:  A curse. You mean like a magic spell?
Tim:  No. In the Bible, the curse is when God hands people over to the 
consequences of seizing our own blessing on our own terms. It’s a curse 
because instead of abundance and life, we end up with scarcity, isolation, 
and death. So God curses the ground. And instead of fruitfulness, there 
will be famine. Instead of overseeing the world, they will have to work the 
land until they die.
Jon:  Man.
Tim:  But God also curses that deceptive creature that fooled the humans, 
saying that a human will come one day to destroy it. And that human will 
be born into a world of scarcity, where men and women and families and 
tribes are all locked in violent conflict.5
Jon:  If God’s blessing is now covered with a curse, how can we flourish? Even 
more, how can we rule with God?
Blessing of Israel
Tim:  Well, here the biblical story takes an interesting turn. God chooses one 
couple: Abraham and Sarah. And God blesses them and says they will 
become a huge family.6
Jon:  “Be fruitful and multiply!”
Tim:  And there’s more. God says that his blessing on Abraham and his family is 
for this larger purpose, so that through them, God’s blessing can go out to 
all of the nations.
Jon:  So wait. God’s plan is to reverse the curse and restore the blessing by first 
blessing this one family?
Tim:  Right. And this family does experience God’s blessing. Even when they 
journey through times of danger and scarcity, they grow into this huge 
nation, Israel.
Jon:  And God brings them to a mountain and invites them to be  
his representatives.7
Tim:  Yes. God will bless Israel so that they can become a blessing to the 
nations. All they have to do is trust and live by God’s wisdom. And they’re 
told that this is a choice between life and death, between blessing  
and curse.802:15-03:404. Genesis 3
5. Genesis 3:15
6. Genesis 12
7. Exodus 19:6
8. Deuteronomy 30:15-20Jon:  Now, keep reading because the Israelites almost never trust God for his 
blessing. Their story is filled with tales of deception and violent grabs for 
power, resulting in the ultimate curse: exile from their land and slavery to 
foreign nations.9
Tim:  But Israel’s prophets, who lived through all of this, they still trusted in 
God’s promise to Abraham. And they anticipated a future Israelite who 
would come to restore God’s blessing and reverse the curse, for Israel and 
for all the nations.10
Blessing Through Jesus
Jon:  When we turn to the story of Jesus, we find Israel still experiencing the 
curse, living as slaves to the Roman empire.
Tim:  But Jesus—he so trusted in God’s blessing, he claimed that it was arriving 
in a new way, through himself.11
Jon:  He wanted his followers to trust in God’s abundance, to share and  
be generous.
Tim:  And he even taught his followers to bless people who curse them.12  
Jesus would even reverse the curse by healing and restoring  
people’s bodies.13
Jon:  God’s blessing is being unleashed.
Tim:  Jesus also confronted his fellow Israelites who were in power, and he 
accused them of getting in the way of God’s plan to bless Israel and the 
nations through them.
Jon:  Those leaders arrested Jesus, so they could have him killed.
Tim:  And instead of fighting back, Jesus believed that he was that chosen 
Israelite who would face the curse that Israel and all humanity deserves, 
and he would allow the curse to fall on him.
Jon:  Jesus dies the shameful death of a man under the curse.14
Tim:  But just as God brought life and blessing out of darkness in the beginning, 
so here, through Jesus, God reverses death by raising Jesus. The curse is 
put to death so that the blessing of God’s life can spread out once again.03:41-04:559. 2 Kings 24:10-14
10. Isaiah 53
11. John 14:6
12. Luke 6:27-30
13. Luke 5:17-26
14. Galatians 3:13Blessing the Nations
Jon:  After his resurrection, Jesus blessed his followers, and he said that his 
presence would be with them as they learn to trust in God’s blessing and 
share with others.
Tim:  And while death and the curse still have a hold on our world, followers of 
Jesus trust that the power of God’s blessing is even stronger.
Jon:  It means we can live with extreme generosity, even when it seems like 
there’s not enough.
Tim:  And that leads us to the conclusion of the biblical story, where every 
nation is enjoying the gifts of God’s abundance. Because in God’s new 
world that is sustained by the life-giving power of Jesus, there is no longer 
any curse.15 15. Revelation 22:304:56-05:33