SECTION 1: THE ROLE OF CHARACTERS IN BIBLICAL NARRATIVE     00:00 - 00:48
Jon: We’re talking about how to read biblical narrative, or in 
other words, how to read stories.
Tim: Right! And one of the main ingredients of any good story 
is characters who encounter conflict and then have to 
overcome it. 
Jon: Yeah. Let’s talk about characters. In most stories, we quickly 
identify with characters because, just like them, we’re in 
our own story having our own conflicts that we need to 
overcome.
Tim: Yeah, and good stories have characters with relatable 
struggles. We can watch them react to these challenges in 
different ways, and we get to see what happens as a result. 
Through characters, an author can show us their view 
of what it means to be human. The Bible is no different. 
Biblical stories use characters as a mirror, so we can see 
ourselves and discover our own human nature in the 
reflection.1 
1. “Characters are something the biblical 
authors tend to speak with  rather than 
about.” — J.M. MCCRACKEN, CHARACTER IN 
THE BOUNDARIES OF BIBLICAL NARRATIVECharacter in
Biblical Narrative
STUDY NOTESHOW TO READ THE BIBLE: EPISODE 6
WATCH THE “CHARACTER IN BIBLICAL NARRATIVE” 
VIDEO AND LEARN MORE AT THEBIBLEPROJECT.COM
SECTION 2: CHARACTERS WITHIN BIBLICAL LITERARY STYLE         00:48 - 02:10
Jon: The thing about characters in the Bible is that they can 
be hard to relate to. Often, there’s very little detail about 
them.2
Tim: Yeah. Biblical authors develop characters differently than 
modern narratives. They prefer to communicate a lot 
through minimal detail.3 For example, we rarely hear what 
people look like in the Bible, but when we do, it’s crucially 
important for the story. 
2. “The Greek storytelling tendency of 
loading the story with details is one 
that modern literary practice has by 
and large adopted and developed. 
Precisely for that reason we have to 
adjust our habits as readers in order to 
bring an adequate attentiveness to the 
rather different narrative maneuvers 
characteristic of the Hebrew Bible. 
The underlying biblical conception 
of people’s character is that they’re 
unpredictable, constantly emerging 
from and slipping back into ambiguity. 
Thus, biblical narrative style is marked 
by the art of reticence.” — ROBERT ALTER, 
THE ART OF BIBLICAL NARRATIVE
3. Two categorical techniques describe 
how biblical characters are presented 
in a narrative. “Direct characterization” 
is when a narrative tells you about 
characters in straightforward detail.  
“Indirect characterization” is when 
the narrative shows you who they are 
within the context of a story. Direct 
characterization is extremely rare 
in the Bible. The author Adele Berlin 
explains the difference as being similar 
to realism and impressionism in visual 
art. Modern realism (think western/
Greek narrative style) uses precise 
brush strokes in its aim to convey near 
photo-realistic visual objectivity. On 
the other hand, impressionism (think 
biblical narrative style) recreates the sensation of an account by way of the 
artist highlighting aesthetic values 
within the composition, prioritizing 
free-form brush strokes over detail-
oriented techniques.  
 
In her book, Poetics and Interpretation 
of Biblical Narrative , Adele Berlin 
writes that in impressionist art, “the 
suggestion of a thing may be more 
convincing than a detailed portrayal. 
This is due to the tendency of our 
brains to project meaning onto images 
in order to complete our expectations. 
We see what we expect to see, and 
the surrounding information guides 
our perception. This is why we fill in a 
partially drawn figure to conform to 
our expectations, and in some cases 
too much information may destroy 
the image. The trick, from the artists 
point of view, is how much detail to 
include and how much to omit. This is 
a good corrective for those who wish 
biblical stories provided more concrete 
details, but this is precisely its narrative 
technique. The gaps left in all biblical 
narratives are intentional, so that with 
a few deft strokes the biblical author 
engages the imagination of the reader 
to construct a picture that is more 
“real” than if he had filled in David or 
Abraham or Joseph’s portrait with 
more detail. Minimal representation 
can give maximal illusion.”
Jon: Like we’re told that Saul is tall and David was kind of a runt.4
Tim: And these become images of their moral character. Saul’s 
height matches his love of status and power to impose 
authority, while David humbly accepts his low status and 
allows God to exalt and deliver him.  
Jon: So people’s physical appearances are symbolic?
Tim: Yeah, very often. Like Esau’s hairy body fits his animal-like 
behavior, and Jacob’s smooth skin matches his deceptive, 
slippery nature.5 
Jon: What other clues do we get about biblical characters?
Tim: Well, often people’s names symbolizes their role in 
the story. “Abraham” in Hebrew sounds like “father of 
a multitude,” “Jacob” means “deceiver,” Ruth means 
“refreshment,” and Saul, his name means “the one asked 
for.” He’s the flawed king that the people requested.6 
4. See a description of Saul in 1 Samuel 
9:2. In 1 Samuel 16:11, we read that 
David is a shepherd and the youngest 
of his brothers.
5. See Genesis 27:11.6. DIG IN:  Adam means “humanity,” Elijah 
means “Yahweh is my God,” Israel 
means “struggles with God.” Think of a 
biblical character, and then find out the 
meaning of their name. Try this with the 
names Mahlon and Kilion in Ruth 1:5
Jon: So by packing all this meaning with very little detail, biblical 
stories can do a lot with a little space. 
Tim: And they even leave out things that modern readers want 
to know about these characters. Like they rarely come out 
and tell us people’s thoughts or motives.7
SECTION 3: CHARACTERS AND MEANING IN BIBLICAL NARRATIVE       02:10 - 5:03
Jon: Right, like when Moses saw an Egyptian beating an Israelite, 
he kills him on the spot.8 But why? Was this righteous 
anger, or did he just lose his cool? And was it okay with God 
that he did it?
Tim: Yeah. We’re not told because biblical authors usually 
avoid giving moral commentary.9 They would rather 
have a character’s words and actions reveal their motives 
7. Biblical narrative will often pause for 
a key character to offer a long speech, 
poem, or song. Sometimes, but not 
always, their character is further 
revealed within these texts. For an 
example, check out the speeches and 
prayers in Joshua 24, 1 Samuel 8 and 
12, and 1 Kings 8. Also, look up these 
poems and songs in Genesis 49, Exodus 
15, and 1 Samuel 2.
8. See Exodus 2:11-13.
9. “Once you realize the Bible’s anti-
didactic style is a narrative policy, 
you gain insight into the role of the 
aesthetic subtlety of these stories. 
They almost always shun extended commentary or explanation, let alone 
homiletics. These authors intentionally 
leave gaps for the reader to puzzle over 
— discontinuities, indeterminacies, 
non-sequiturs, unexplained motives 
— and they’re fully aware of the 
disorienting effect this has on readers 
as they try to draw lessons from the 
past. Biblical narrators conceal the 
meaning of their stories to an extent 
seldom equaled by any other literature 
in history. This style was not inherited 
by Israel’s neighboring cultures, rather 
it was invented and elaborated in the 
Israelite tradition of narrative and it’s 
nothing less than deliberate. — MEIR 
STERNBERG, THE POETICS OF BIBLICAL 
NARRATIVE
and then leave us to judge their behavior by seeing the 
consequences.10  
 So in the case of Moses, this murder’s the beginning of 
a pattern of his anger getting the best of him with bad 
results. This choice forces him to run and hide in the desert 
for forty years.
Jon: So it was a bad thing, but he does meets his wife out there, 
so it’s a good thing?
Tim: Exactly. It forces you to ponder. Through all these 
techniques, the biblical narrators keep the stories compact, 
memorable, but also engaging.
Jon: But seriously. Was Moses being good or bad? Right? Like 
in classic stories, there’s always a good guy and a bad guy, 
some admirable hero who faces off against some horrible 
villain. 
Tim: Sure, and simplified characters like that are helpful for 
teaching children there’s such a thing as good and evil, but 
the Bible is not a children’s book. Its characters are very 
complex, a mixed bag of good and evil, just like us. There’s 
hardly any flawless characters in the Bible. 
Jon: What about the heroes of the faith, like Abraham or King 
David? 
10. Biblical authors use characters as a 
vehicle for their message, primarily 
through showing rather than telling.  
These characters possess agency in 
their ability to communicate ethical 
values. Shimon Bar-Efrat writes in his 
book, The Art of Biblical Narrative : 
“Most of an author’s view of the 
world and the values they want to 
communicate are embodied in the 
narrative and expressed through the 
characters. Not only do characters serve as a narrator’s mouthpiece, but 
also what is and is not related about 
them, which of their personality traits 
are emphasized and which are not, 
these all reveal the ethical values and 
moral norms within the narrative. The 
decisions that characters are called 
upon to make when confronted with 
moral choices, and the results of 
their decisions provide indisputable 
evidence of a narrative’s ethical 
dimension.”
Tim: You mean Abraham who used an Egyptian slave for sex and 
then lied about his wife two times to save his own neck?  
And David!? The man after God’s own heart who sleeps 
with another man’s wife and then murders him?11 These 
stories are anything but simplistic; they offer us realistic 
portraits of compromised people like ourselves.12 The real 
surprise is that God keeps working with them despite their 
failures.13 
11. Read these stories about Abraham in 
Genesis 16:3-4; 12:19, and 20:2. Read 
about David, Bathsheba and Uriah in 2 
Samuel 11.
12. “In day to day life, knowledge 
and information and the ability to 
understand the meaning of events 
is power. But in reading the Bible, 
we’re constantly puzzling over the 
gaps in the stories [Why did Moses 
do that? Why did God do that?], and 
this is strategic: our puzzlement is an 
imitation of our real position in life. 
It exposes our ignorance about the 
meaning of history or our lives. Biblical 
stories imitate our real-life conditions 
of inference, as we too are daily 
surrounded by ambiguities, baffled 
and misled by appearances, reduced to 
piecing fragments together by trial and 
error of interpretation, and we’re often 
left in the dark about the meaning of 
our lives to the very end. The scarcity 
of commentary by the biblical narrators 
forces us to constantly evaluate the 
character’s motives and the meaning 
of the plot as we look for clues. It is 
only by sustained effort that the reader 
of biblical narratives can attain to the 
point of view that God has possessed 
all along. Making sense of biblical 
stories is to gain a sense of being 
human.“  — MEIR STERNBERG, THE POETICS 
OF BIBLICAL NARRATIVE: IDEOLOGICAL 
LITERATURE AND THE DRAMA OF READING13. Throughout biblical narrative, we see 
the character of God playing either 
a present (interventionist) role, or an 
absent (supervisory) role. For example, 
God is present and intervening in the 
stories of Genesis 1-11, as well as in 
the wilderness stories in the book of 
Numbers. He is walking, talking, and 
directly interacting with people. On 
the other hand, within the stories of 
Genesis 37-50, the David stories, and 
in the books of Esther and Ruth, God 
is depicted as an indirect, sporadically 
known, and hard to perceive character. 
God is supervising events from behind 
the scenes. The drama is about how 
the characters will relate to God 
when they don’t know what’s going 
on. Regarding this, Yairah Amit, in 
her book Reading Biblical Narratives , 
writes: “The more God is depicted 
as a present character, commanding 
or testing, punishing or forgiving, 
the more the human characters are 
depicted in a flat manner, as singular 
types such as rebellious, obedient, or 
sinful. But when God is portrayed as 
absent or behind the scenes, there is 
more narrative space for multi-faceted 
human characters and their complex 
motives.”
Jon: So just because a person is called by God, or wins a battle, 
or becomes successful or wealthy doesn’t mean the author 
wants me to act like them?
Tim: Right. It would actually be really dangerous to imitate most 
biblical characters.
Jon: True, but there must be something admirable in biblical 
characters–something I can imitate. 
Tim: Absolutely! Pay attention, and you’ll notice that most 
biblical stories highlight the moments when characters fail 
or come to the end of themselves, and then they choose 
radical trust in God’s grace and wisdom. It’s in these stories 
that the authors show us how to be a human who truly 
pleases God through humility and surrender. 
Jon: Yeah. The fact that God stays committed to biblical 
characters is a profound statement about the patience and 
love of God, who is also a character.14  
Tim: Right, and by studying biblical characters, we can observe 
our own worst tendencies on display. And we see time 
and again God’s gracious response that will see this story 
through to the end. 
14. God is the only character who 
continues through every movement of 
the biblical narrative from beginning to 
end. This shows us that a fundamental 
purpose within these stories is to reveal 
God’s character, identity, and purposes 
in history. In the first few chapters 
of Genesis, we see God’s character 
in his desire to share with humans 
goodness and love and for us to share 
in this with each other. We read of God bringing justice on human evil as well 
as forgiveness and restoration. We can 
observe God’s identity as the author 
of the universe revealed through the 
family of Abraham and Israel, and then 
ultimately through Jesus of Nazareth.  
We can see that God’s purpose is to 
rescue his creation from evil, so that 
it can be shared together in love for 
eternity.
