  1Introduction
If you tried to describe what God is like, it could be difficult or daunting. 
But when the people who wrote the Bible pondered the mystery of God, 
they consistently described God’s character in this way: compassionate 
and gracious, slow to anger, overflowing with loyal love and faithfulness.1
We’re going to look at this last characteristic of God. It’s the Hebrew 
word emet , which can be translated as “faithfulness,” or even “truth.” 
It’s related to another word you’ve probably heard before, amen , 
which is an untranslated Hebrew expression meaning, “that’s truth!”
Emet  in the Hebrew Bible
So emet  can mean truth, and it can refer to correct ideas or 
concepts. This is because emet  has to do with stability and reliability, 
like when Moses holds up his hands for hours to defeat Israel’s 
enemies, the Amalekites. His friends put a rock under him and 
support his hands, so that his hands will remain emet  or steady.2 
When emet  is used of people, it describes reliable and stable 
character or trustworthiness. Like when Moses appoints 
leaders in Israel, they’re to be “people of emet ,” people who 
are trustworthy, who won’t take bribes or distort justice.3
God is Trustworthy
So to say that God is “full of emet ” doesn’t just mean that God tells the 
truth or stands for truth. It means that God is faithful and trustworthy. 
This is why Moses calls God “a rock,” saying that he is faithful, just, and 
upright. He’s saying that he can trust God to be consistent to his character.
And the Hebrew word for trust is actually the verb form of the word  
emet —it’s he’emin . It can be translated as “to believe” or “to have faith,” but 
most basically it means “to consider someone trustworthy” or “to trust.”Character of God: Faithful
Script References
1. Exodus 34:6
2. Exodus 17:11-12
3. Exodus 18:210:00-0:33
0:34-1:10
1:11-1:45  2Humans Trusting in God
The first person we meet in the Bible who considers God to be 
trustworthy is Abraham. God makes a promise that Abraham and 
his wife Sarah will have a huge family, and that through them, all 
nations will experience God’s blessing.4 But Abraham and Sarah 
are really, really old, and they’ve never been able to have any 
children. And yet, in the face of these challenges, Abraham he’emins  
God. He considers God trustworthy to open a way forward.5
And God does show emet  to Abraham and Sarah. In just four generations 
their descendants form a whole nation, called Israel. And God invites Israel 
into a trusting and faithful relationship. And when God leads them out of 
slavery in Egypt, Israel he’emins  in God. They trust and rely on him.6 But 
when they come to the land God promised to Abraham, and they find out 
it’s filled with giant cities protected by giants, their trust in God’s emet  fails. 
But eventually, we meet an Israelite who does trust God in the face of 
giants: it’s David. He yells at the giant, “You come with a sword and a 
spear, but I come with the name of the God of Israel!” David consistently 
relies on God. In fact, it’s said that David “walked in emet ” before God.7 
So David considers God to be faithful and responds with faithfulness. 
This is why God promises to raise up a faithful descendant of David, 
whose kingdom will endure forever, or in Hebrew, have emet .8 This faithful 
king will become the source of trust and stability for others forever. 
God’s Emet  Fulfilled
But when the kingdom later collapses, the Israelites find themselves 
without a home and without a king. And they cry out, “Oh God, 
where is your loyal love that you swore to David in your emet ?”9 
They’re accusing God of abandoning his promises to Abraham 
and to David. Is God trustworthy? Is he faithful after all?
The first line of the New Testament is an answer to that question. “This is 
the lineage of Jesus the Messiah: the son of David, the son of Abraham.”10 
In other words, through Jesus, God fulfills his promises. Or as Paul says, 
Jesus came on behalf of God’s faithfulness.11 He is the faithful king, whose 
kingdom will endure forever, and who invites all nations to trust God. 1:46-3:21
3:22-4:094. Genesis 12:1-3
5. Genesis 15:6
8. 2 Samuel 7:166. Exodus 14:31
10. Matthew 1:19. Psalm 89:497. 1 Kings 3:6
11. Romans 15:8-9  3Conclusion
Now, trusting anyone is risky. It’s hard to know if anyone is really “full 
of emet .” But the biblical story portrays a God who has been faithful 
all along and whose promises were fulfilled in the story of Jesus. 
And so as we look out at the obstacles facing us and our world, 
we’re invited to take that same risk and join Abraham, David, and the 
people of God in trusting that God is overflowing with faithfulness.4:10-4:39