  1Visual Bible:   
Exodus 34:6-7  
SCRIPT REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION 0:00/hyphen.uc1:10
Jon: The Bible is a collection of many ancient Israelite scrolls, and together they’re 
telling one uni/f.shortied story. 
Tim: Now, if you look at the second scroll, Exodus, you’ll /f.shortind two important sen-
tences. They’re actually so important that they’re referenced and re-quoted 
over twenty more times within the Bible itself. 
Jon: Okay, yeah. That must be important. What does it say?
Tim: Yahweh, Yahweh (that’s God’s name), a God compassionate and gracious, 
slow to anger, over/f.shortlowing with loyal love and faithfulness. 1
Jon: I can see why it’s repeated so often. These attributes of God are really lovely.
Tim: And the statement goes on. He maintains loyal love for thousands, forgiving 
iniquity, transgression, and sin, yet he won’t declare innocent the guilty. He 
will bring the iniquities of the fathers upon the children and grandchildren, to 
the third and the fourth. 2
Jon: Okay, hold on. This last part takes a bit of a turn. We’re /f.shortirst talking about God’s 
love, and suddenly it’s about his judgement on grandkids? So is God merciful 
or vengeful?
Tim: Yeah. Great question. Let’s see these words in a larger context by looking at 
something important in Genesis, the /f.shortirst scroll of the Bible.
1. Exodus 34:6 2. Exodus 34:7Exodus 34:6-7 
Character of God Series  2THE EXODUS STORY    1:11/hyphen.uc3:12
Tim: There, God chooses one family, the Israelities, from among the nations, and 
he promises that he’s going to rescue the whole world through this family 
somehow.
Jon: And Genesis ends with the family of Abraham in Egypt.
Tim: Then the book of Exodus begins, and this book has two large movements. 
Jon: Right, okay. So this /f.shortirst movement of Exodus: God rescues Israel from slavery 
in Egypt. 3
Tim: And in the second movement, God leads them to Mount Sinai where they 
camp out for a year. And God invites this whole nation into a partnership 
called a covenant, so that they can be shaped by his values and character.
Jon: And represent God to all the other nations.  
Tim: Exactly. Now, this whole Mount Sinai movement in Exodus 4 can be broken up 
into four literary units. First there’s the actual ceremony where the Israelites 
agree to be God’s partners. 5 And God sets up the terms of the relationship, 
starting with the ten commandments. The /f.shortirst two are:
Jon: Don’t give your allegiance to other gods, and don’t make any idol images of 
God. Seems simple enough!
Tim: After that, God shows Moses detailed blueprints for building this sacred 
home, so that God can come and live among them.
Jon: Oh right, and then comes a really long narrative about the building of that 
sacred home. 6
3. Exodus 1:1-18:27
4. Exodus 19-405. Exodus 19-24 
6. Exodus 35-40  3Tim: But you missed something. Right in between these sections is the story that 
has our description about God’s character. 7 This story begins with Moses go-
ing up on the mountain, writing down the partner agreement as the Israelites 
are at the base of the mountain violating the /f.shortirst two commands!
Jon: That’s ridiculous! They’re breaking the covenant vows while the ceremony is 
still going on.
Tim: Yes, and so God is hurt and angry. And he warns Moses that this betrayal will 
keep on happening. God is ready to call it quits.
Jon: But what about his promise to rescue the world through them?
Tim: Yeah, exactly. This is what Moses brings up. And so what is God going to do? 
Should he end the partnership, which would be fair?
Jon: Or will he be faithful to his promise to Abraham and show them mercy?
GOD’S MERCY AND JUSTICE    3:13/hyphen.uc4:57
Tim: Yeah, exactly. Now look back at the words that we began with, and you’ll see 
they’re about this very tension between God’s mercy and his justice.
Jon: Okay, so the statement opens like this: “a God compassionate and gracious.”  
Tim: In Hebrew, this line has three words that rhyme, el rakhum vekhanun. And the 
line, “over/f.shortlowing with loyal-love and faithfulness,” matches the /f.shortirst, as it also 
has three Hebrew words, rab khesed ve-’emet.
Jon: Each of those lines have two attributes of God, and they surround a /f.shortifth at -
tribute, that God is “slow to anger.” 
Tim: Right. Now that’s the /f.shortirst half of this description of God. Then comes the 
second half. God maintains loyal love for thousands. And how is he going to 
7. Exodus 32-34  4remain loyal to people who keep rebelling against him? By forgiving iniquity, 
transgression, and sin.
Jon: Ah, but God’s forgiveness doesn’t mean people can just do whatever they 
want.
Tim: Right. God’s mercy is balanced in what follows. “Yet he won’t declare inno-
cent the guilty. He’ll bring the iniquities of the fathers upon the children and 
grandchildren, to the third and the fourth.”
Jon: The third and the fourth what?
Tim: Well, it’s referring to generations of people who repeat their ancestors’ rebel-
lion against God; they’ll get what they deserve. But notice this small number 
of generations contrasts that massive number up above.
Jon: God’s loyal love to thousands.
Tim: Right. And then check this out. God’s forgiveness of iniquity in this line is 
contrasted with his justice on iniquity in this line.
Jon: Okay, and all those lines are surrounding a central line here about God’s jus-
tice. “He will not declare innocent the guilty.” So while God is slow to anger, 
he is also just.
CONCLUSION    4:58/hyphen.uc5:38
Tim: Right. This is the tension that these two sentences are exploring. How does 
a faithful and loyal God deal with such a rebellious people? This is the chal-
lenge God faces in this story, and it’s the same challenge he faces in the 
whole biblical story as he works to rescue the world through this family.
Jon: With that in mind, we can take a closer look at these /f.shortive attributes that God 
declares about himself to Moses, a God compassionate and gracious, slow 
to anger, over/f.shortlowing in loyal love and faithfulness.
Tim: And we’ll see how each one leads us deeper into the character of God and 
into the story of the Bible. 