Torah Series: Deuteronomy 
Script References
Introduction  
Tim:  The book of Deuteronomy, the epic conclusion to the Torah. And spoiler 
alert: Moses is going to die. Now, in order to understand this book we 
need to remember the story so far. 
Jon: So Israel has escaped from slavery in Egypt. 1 Then they spend one year at 
Mount Sinai. 2
Tim: This is where they made the covenant with God to obey all of these laws.
Jon: Then they wander around in the desert for 40 years before they make it to 
the Jordan River, which is right across from the land God promised them. 
They are ready to go in. This is where the book of Deuteronomy begins.
Moses’ Final Speech  
Tim: And what this book is, really, is a speech. Moses gives these final words. 
It’s like a pep talk to the new generation of Israel that’s about to go into the 
land. And the speech, it’s broken up into three large sections. 3
Jon: Moses begins the first part of the speech 4 with a somber tone because 
he’s highlighting Israel’s rebellion and resistance which has been going on 
for the last 40 years. 
Tim: And that sets up the rest of this opening section ,5 which is Moses’ 
challenge to this new generation to be different from their parents and to 
respond to God’s grace with love and obedience. So he reminds them of 
the ten commandments, like the basics of the covenant, and then he gives 
them this very famous line.
Listen and Love  
Jon: “Listen, O Israel: The LORD is our God, the LORD alone. Love the LORD 
your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your 
strength.” 6 00:00–00:31
1. Exodus 14
2. Exodus 19:1-40:38
00:32–01:09
3. Deuteronomy 1-11,  
 12-26, 27-34
4. Deuteronomy 1-3
5. Deuteronomy 4-11
01:10–02:40
6. Deuteronomy 6:4-5Tim:  Now in Jewish tradition, this is called the Shema, because the first Hebrew 
word in this line is “ Shema , Israel.” And this became a very important 
prayer in Judaism, said twice a day. And it emphasizes the Israelites’ 
exclusive commitment to their God, the one true God who loved them and 
who rescued them from slavery.
Jon: Right because they are about to go into a land where people are 
worshiping many other gods. 
Tim:  And Moses thinks that loyalty to the Lord their God is the only way to life. 
Now, notice these keywords in the Shema: “listen” and “love.” You’re going 
to find these words all over this opening section of the speech. The word 
"listen" in Hebrew means more than just let sound waves come into your 
ears. It includes the idea of responding to what you hear. So for Israel, this 
means responding to God’s grace by obeying the laws of the covenant.
Jon:  And then listen is always followed by love.
Tim:  Yeah. So love is the true motivation for obeying the laws. Israel won’t obey 
without love. And they don’t truly love if they don’t obey. So there’s this 
tight connection between loving and listening that runs through the entire 
book. 
 And  so Moses tells them that if they do listen and love, they will fulfill their 
original calling as the family of Abraham—to show all the nations the 
wisdom and justice of God and so become a blessing to them. 
A Second Law  
Jon: The second big section in Deuteronomy is a large block of laws and 
commands. 
Tim:  And this is where the book gets its name. Deuteronomy means a “second 
law.” And it’s because many of these laws we’ve heard before. In fact, 
in the first line of the book, we’re told that Moses is here explaining or 
clarifying the laws. 7 So he’s repeating and expanding on the laws, making 
them relevant to this new generation. 
Jon:  There’s laws about how Israel is to worship God, 8 laws about their 
leadership structure, 9 laws about social justice, 10 and then some more laws 
about their worship. 11 
Tim:  Now, after all the laws, 12 Moses warns Israel of the consequences of their 
obedience or disobedience, or in his words, “the blessing or the curse.”  
If they listen and love, they will experience blessing and abundance in the 
land. And if they don’t, there’s going to be famine, and plagues, and they’ll 
be forced off their land into exile.  02:41–03:31
7. Deuteronomy 1:5
8. Deuteronomy 12-16
9. Deuteronomy 16-18
10. Deuteronomy 19-25
11. Deuteronomy 26
12. Deuteronomy 27-30Invitation to Choose Life  
Jon: And that brings us to the final section of his speech. 
Tim: Yeah. Here Moses says, “I’ve set before you today life or death, blessing or 
curse. So choose life!” 13 But then things get really interesting because after 
40 years with these people, Moses knows they’re not going to obey. And 
so he predicts their failure and even their future exile from the promised 
land. 14 And he focuses on what he thinks is the true source of the problem, 
that they have hard and selfish hearts. It’s as if Israel is incapable of truly 
loving God in a way that brings about obedience. 
Jon: But this problem isn’t unique to Israel. 
Tim: Yeah. In fact, Moses, when he’s using this language of blessing and curse, 
he is tying Israel’s story all the way back to all humanity’s story from 
Genesis 1-3. 
Jon: So Adam and Eve, they were blessed by God, just like Israel, and given a 
choice to trust and obey God, like Israel.
Tim:  And then they rebelled and brought a curse on the land, 15 like Moses 
knows Israel is going to do. And so these stories, they’re about Israel's hard 
heart, but they’re actually a window into the universal human condition.
New Transformed Hearts  
Jon: But Moses doesn’t give up hope entirely. 
Tim: That’s right. He says that somehow, on the other side of Israel’s exile, God 
promises to transform their hearts so that one day they truly can listen and 
love. 16
Jon: In the final chapters, Joshua is appointed as the new leader of Israel. 
Tim: And then Moses takes the entire law code. 
Jon: The one he just predicted Israel would break.
Tim: That’s right, and he puts it into the ark of the covenant. 17 And then Moses 
hikes up to the top of a mountain so he can see the promised land from 
afar, and then he dies. 18 And that’s how the Torah ends. 
Jon: Which is a strange place to end a story. I mean, it is right there at the 
climax. Will they obey the laws and live faithfully in the land or not?
Tim: Well, the story does continue right into Joshua, the next book of the Bible. 
But this is the end of the Torah, and it’s been ended here for a reason.  
The Torah is written for people who are either outside of the land or 
who are still waiting for the fulfillment of God’s promise to bless the 
whole world. And so now as each generation reads the Torah, they find 
themselves called to hope in what Moses hoped for, a new transformed 
heart that one day can truly listen and love.03:32–04:40
13. Deuteronomy 30:19-20
14. Deuteronomy 32:15-43
15. Genesis 3
04:41–05:52
16. Deuteronomy 30:6
17. Deuteronomy 31:24-26
18. Deuteronomy 34