Exile 
Script References
Introduction
Jon: There’s something about being home where everything’s just right. We’re 
surrounded by people we love and trust. There is a feeling of stability  
and safety. 
Tim: And while some people get to experience this kind of home, many do not. 
Others might even be forced to leave their home and go live in a foreign 
land. We call this going into exile. 
Jon: Yeah. In exile everything is disorienting. You are in the unknown. 
Tim: And in the story of the Bible, this is where the ancient Israelites found 
themselves—conquered by Babylon, living in exile, far from their 
homeland.  
Jon: And so they had to ask themselves: how did we end up here? And is there 
any hope of going home? 
Tim: And the whole story of the Bible is designed to address those  
very questions. 
Jon: The whole story? Really?
Humanity’s Exile
Tim: Yeah. Go back to the first pages of the Bible. Where does humanity live? 
Jon: Okay. They live in this really sweet garden—their home. 1
Tim: And they’re there on one condition: that they trust and follow God’s one 
command. And they don’t. And so the consequence is banishment from 
the garden. 2 00:00-00:51
00:52-01:44
1. Genesis 1-2
2. Genesis 3Jon: Ah, they’re sent into exile. 
Tim: Exactly. And so this story’s been designed to set you up for Israel’s story, 
how they were given the gift of the promised land and were able to stay 
there on one condition: that they be faithful to the terms of their covenant 
relationship with God.
Jon: They didn’t, and they were sent into exile. 
Tim: And if you still don’t see the parallel between exile from the garden and 
exile from Israel, think about this. In Genesis, humanity’s exile led up to the 
story about the building of what city? 3
Jon: Oh yeah! Babylon! The same place the Israelites are sent.
Longing for Home
Tim: But that’s not the end of either story. In the first Babylon, God called 
Abraham to leave and travel to the promised land. 4 And that story was 
designed to give hope to Israelites currently living in the later Babylon. 5
Jon: Now eventually they do get to leave and travel back to their  
promised land. 6
Tim: And when they did, it wasn’t home sweet home. Oppressive empires were 
still ruling over them, and the people kept acting in the same corrupt 
ways as their ancestors. And so the biblical prophets said that exile wasn’t 
actually over. 7
Jon: How could they think they were still in exile when they’re at home?
Tim: Yeah. This is really important. In the Hebrew Scriptures, Israel’s Babylonian 
exile became an image of something more universal. It's that feeling of 
alienation and longing for something more, no matter where you live. 
Jon: Yeah. I can relate to this. I have a great home, but it’s situated in a world 
scarred with pain and broken relationships, death, and tragedy done by 
others but also done by me. 
Tim: And so in the Bible, exile is the human condition. We all keep repeating 
this pattern of human corruption leading to a Babylon that we can’t 
escape. And it doesn't matter where you live, we are all longing for a 
better home. 
Jesus’ Heart for the Exiles
Jon: Now Israel’s Scriptures held out hope that one day God would send a king 
who would rescue the world from all of the Babylons we’ve created .8
Tim: And after many generations pass, we meet this Israelite named Jesus 
of Nazareth. He wandered about with no home, announcing the great 3. Genesis 11
01:45-03:03
4. Genesis 12  
5. 2 Kings 17;  
    2 Kings 24-25
6. Ezra 1
7. Ezra 9:8-9;  
    Nehemiah 9:36-37
03:04-04:08
8. Zechariah 10restoration, that reality of home that Israel and all humanity has been 
looking for. 9
Jon: Yeah. Jesus really cared about people who didn’t have homes. He 
welcomed in the stranger. He said God’s love is shown when you invite in 
the outcast and throw parties for people who don’t have a place to belong.
Tim: Jesus also claimed that Israel and all humanity had lost its way, that our 
self-centeredness drives us to create false homes based on status and 
power. And these inevitably exclude others. We live in an exile of our own 
making. But Jesus said the true way home is one of weakness, of service, 
and of forgiveness. And then Jesus went into exile alongside us to show us 
the true way home. 
Jon: Which is?
Jesus Is the Way Home
Tim: Well, Jesus said he is the way. His life and self-giving love proved more 
powerful than humanity’s failure. He opened up a pathway to our  
real home. And as Jesus’ followers committed themselves to him, they 
discovered this new way of being human. They believed that the real 
return from exile had begun, and so they would call themselves sojourners 
or wanderers. 10
Jon: Oh right. They would say things like “the world isn’t our home” and “we’re 
citizens of Heaven.”  
Tim: And so Jesus’ followers remain exiles as they wait for that day when Jesus 
returns to transform this world into a true home.  9. Matthew 1
04:09-04:50
10. 1 Peter 1:1-2, 2:11-12,  
      5:13