Torah Series: Exodus 19-40 
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: The first half of the book of Exodus tells the story of ancient Israel being 
rescued from slavery. And when people say “the exodus story,” those are 
the chapters they are referring to. 1
Tim: But the book has a second half, where Moses gives the ten 
commandments to Israel, along with these instructions about building a 
sacred tent.
Jon: And what links these two halves together is this crucial story. The people 
of Israel, they’re out in the middle of nowhere. They find themselves at 
the foot of this mountain called Sinai, and here God’s presence comes 
dramatically down in the form of a violent storm cloud. 
God’s Presence with his People  
Tim: Now, let’s stop a second and talk about the concept of God’s presence 
because it’s really important for the rest of the book. At the beginning of 
the Bible, in the garden of Eden, humanity was in God’s presence. They 
had this close relationship with him and it was good. 2 But humanity rebels, 
and the relationship is fractured, and access to God’s presence is lost. 3 
But God promised Abraham that he would restore his blessing to all of the 
nations, and that includes this restoration of relationship and access to 
God’s presence. 4
Jon: So here at Sinai, God’s presence is now right here in front of them, and it 
is actually quite frightening. And he’s here to invite Israel into this unique 
and close relationship with him. 5
Tim: And the word used to describe this relationship is “covenant.” It’s like a 
legal agreement between God and Israel. And it’s unique because, up until 
now, God hasn’t asked Israel to do anything in return—just to trust him. 
But here on this mountain, God is going to ask Israel to do something—a 00:00–00:30
1. Exodus 1-15
00:31–02:36
2. Genesis 1-2
3. Genesis 3
4. Genesis 12
5. Exodus 19lot of things, actually. He gives them a whole set of laws that includes the 
ten commandments, and if they obey these commandments, they will 
become the people who will represent God to the nations of the world. 6
Jon: Like a priest would. 
Tim: Yeah. In fact, that’s what God calls them to become, “a kingdom of 
priests.” 7 And this is all connected back to the promise to Abraham that his 
family would become a blessing to the nations. 8
Jon: Okay, but obeying these laws is going to be difficult because there’s a lot 
of them and they set a really high standard.
Tim: Though if you think about it, I mean, of anybody in the world who should 
be able to do it, I mean, it’s these people who experienced firsthand God’s 
grace and his power when he rescued them from slavery. 
Jon: And they agree to obey the terms, but then they refuse to go into God’s 
presence because it’s, well, it’s still a bit frightening. 9
TIm: And since the people won’t go up, Moses goes up to the mountain by 
himself to meet with God. 10 But God still wants to be with all of his people, 
and so he says, “Okay, if the people won’t come up here to me, I’ll come 
down off this mountain to be with you all.” And that’s why he orders Moses 
to build this elaborate tent as a place where God’s presence can be among 
his people. 
The Tabernacle  
Jon: And that’s why the next thing we get is seven chapters of extremely 
detailed architectural blueprints for this tent. It’s really, really, really long. 11 
Tim: But every detail is important and has some kind of symbolic value. For 
example, there’s all this garden of Eden imagery inside the tent. And it’s to 
remind you that when you are in the tent, you are in God’s presence.
Jon: Then we get another six chapters describing how they build the tent, 
which is really just repeating the same blueprints word for word.
The Golden Calf  
Tim: Now let’s back up because before the tent is finished, there’s this 
super important story. Moses is coming off the mountain with the ten 
commandments and the blueprints in his hands, and he finds Israel 
breaking the first two commands of this covenant. 
Jon: “Don’t have any other gods before me,” and “don’t worship idol statues.” 12 
Tim: Right, and so here we are. Immediately after agreeing to the covenant, 
they are throwing this ritual party. They’re worshiping an idol. 13 And so God 
says to Moses, “You know what? This is not going to work. I should just 
wipe these people out and start over with you.”6. Exodus 19-23
7. Exodus 19:6
8. Genesis 12:3
9. Exodus 20:18-20
10. Exodus 20:21
02:37–03:04
11. Exodus 35-40
03:05–04:01
12. Exodus 20:3-4
13. Exodus 32Jon: But Moses reminds God of his promise to Abraham and pleads with God 
to spare them, 14 which is a really weird conversation. Why would God need 
to be reminded of something?
Tim: Yeah. It does seem odd, but this dialogue is inviting us into God’s 
experience of grief and pain due to Israel’s actions. And he really could 
walk away, but instead, this God chooses faithfulness to his own promises, 
even though he knows it’s going to cost him.
Moses and the Tabernacle  
Jon:  So we come to the end of the book. The tabernacle is built. God’s 
presence comes down off the mountain to fill it. And in the final scene, 
Moses goes to enter the tabernacle to be in God’s presence. 
Tim:  But he can’t. He’s actually not able to go inside, and that’s how the book 
ends. 
Jon: Why can’t he go in? That was the whole point.
Tim: So when Israel worshiped the golden calf, it was like a slap in the face 
to God’s faithfulness. And so Moses can’t just waltz into the tent like 
everything’s just fine. There’s a deeper problem still in this relationship.
Jon: Will they ever be able to fix the relationship and go into God’s presence?
Tim: Well, that’s what the next book, Leviticus, is all about.14. Exodus 32:11-14
04:02–04:38