  1How to Read the Bible   
Apocalyptic Literature  
SCRIPT REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION 0:00-0:22
Jon: It’s the end of the world! The moon turns to blood, mountains crumble, mu -
tant-locusts swarm. These are just some of the strange images we find in 
parts of the Bible called “apocalyptic.”
Tim: And while most people think the biblical word apocalypse means the end of 
the world, it actually doesn’t mean that at all!
Jon: So let’s talk about how to read apocalyptic literature in the Bible.
WHAT DOES APOCALYPSE MEAN?    0:23-0:059
Jon: So wait? The apocalypse doesn’t mean the end of the world?
Tim: No. Apocalypse is a Greek word that means “to uncover” or “reveal.” An 
apocalypse is when you suddenly see the true nature of something that you 
couldn’t see before.
Jon: Because I don’t always see things the way they really are.
Tim: Right. We all develop familiar ways of seeing the world that can limit or blur 
our vision. 
Jon: So an apocalypse is like a revelation.   2Tim: Right. Now, in the Bible, an apocalypse is when God pulls back the curtain to 
show someone what’s really going on in the world from a divine perspective.
Jon: For example...  
APOCALYPTIC STORIES IN THE BIBLE    1:00-1:48
Tim: Take Isaiah the prophet; he’s suddenly transported in a vision into God’s 
throne room.1
Jon: Oh right. He’s in God’s temple, described as a bridge between heaven and 
earth.  
Tim: And there God gives him a divine perspective on Israel’s past, present, and 
their future.2 
Jon: So that Isaiah can bring challenge and comfort to God’s people in his own 
day. 
Tim: Or think about the apostle Paul, who was trying to stop the movement of 
Jesus. But then he gets stopped in his tracks by a vision of the risen Jesus 
himself.3 
Jon: Yeah. He realizes that he’s fighting against the very thing that he’s been hop -
ing for, and it changes the course of his life.
Tim: So these apocalypses give people a heavenly perspective on their earthly 
situation. And they can give hope, or they can challenge you. 
Jon: Or make you change everything.
1. Isaiah 6:1-4
2. Isaiah 6:8-133. Acts 9:1-9    3APOCALYPTIC LITERATURE IN THE BIBLE    1:49-3:32
Tim: Now, those are biblical stories about people having an apocalypse. There are 
also whole sections of biblical books where a prophet describes extended 
apocalyptic dreams and visions. People call this apocalyptic literature.
Jon: And reading these dreams and visions is difficult. I mean, they’re filled with 
strange images, like let’s take Daniel. He sees ferocious beasts coming up out 
of a dark sea trampling people on the land.4 And then a character called “the 
son of man” is exalted to rule the world.5 What is going on?   
Tim: Yeah, apocalyptic literature is written in a poetic, imaginative style, and it’s 
packed with symbolism. 
Jon: How can I know what these symbols mean?
Tim: Well, first, by studying the rest of your Bible! Apocalyptic imagery is based on 
biblical design patterns that begin in the book of Genesis and then develop 
throughout the Bible. Like the chaotic sea in the first sentences of the Bible 
that God tames but doesn’t eliminate as he orders creation.6 And so the sea 
becomes an image of danger, death, and cosmic chaos. 
Jon: And the dry land which comes out of the sea is the safe, ordered place where 
humans are supposed to rule as God’s image. 
Tim: Yes, and also on the land are beasts that humans are supposed to oversee.7 
But keep reading, and the humans are deceived by a beast.8 
Jon: And start acting like violent beasts.
Tim: Exactly. Now, sometimes a prophet will tell you what a symbol means. Like in 
Daniel, we’re told those beasts symbolize violent human kingdoms.9 But more 
often, the authors just assume you know how to trace an image through the 
biblical story to understand its meaning.
4. Daniel 7:1-7
5. Daniel 7:13-14
6. Genesis 1:1-97. Genesis 1:26-28
8. Genesis 3:1-13
9. Daniel 7:15-18  4THE BOOK OF REVELATION    3:33-5:31
Jon: Now, let’s look at the last book of the Bible, The Revelation, because it’s one 
really long vision. The whole thing is an apocalypse!
Tim: Yeah. And it works the same way. It begins with John the visionary transport -
ed to God’s throne room where he sees the risen Jesus as the exalted king 
of the world.10
Jon: But Jesus is depicted as a bloody lamb.11
Tim: Right. It’s a design pattern showing how Jesus is the sacrificial lamb from 
Israel’s Passover and from the Day of Atonement. He gave his life for the sins 
of the world. And then John sees the ultimate beastly dragon, that spiritu -
al power that energizes violent earthly empires; it’s cast out by Jesus, the 
world’s true king.12 
Jon: Yeah. Now, that reminds me. When I read The Revelation, I’m struck by all this 
cosmic destruction and violence. I mean, it happens over and over and over.
Tim: Yeah. In The Revelation, there are three seven-part cycles of God’s judgment, 
and it’s another design pattern that connects the stories of the flood, the 
ten plagues on Egypt, and the exile to Babylon, and even more. These are 
moments when humans unleash so much violence and death into the world 
that God hands them over to self-destruction. It’s like a reversal of creation 
in Genesis chapter 1 as God allows the world and humans to sink back into 
darkness and disorder.
Jon: That’s sobering. 
Tim: It is. But remember, in Genesis 1 God overcame darkness and chaos with his 
light and life. And so too in The Revelation, the death of Jesus and the death 
of the world as we know it is the pathway into the renewed creation that be -
gan with the resurrection of Jesus. 
10. Revelation 1:9-20
11. Revelation 5:6-812. Revelation 12:7-10  5Jon: And so while The Revelation feels like the end of the world....
Tim: It’s actually about the beginning of the renewed world, where heaven and 
earth are reunited and God’s human images rule all creation in the love and 
power of God. 
CONCLUSION    5:32-6:33
Jon: Okay! This is a lot to take in.
Tim: It is. And there’s a lot in these books that is still hard to understand. But the 
purpose of apocalyptic is very clear: to give us a heavenly perspective on 
our earthly circumstances, so that every generation of God’s people can be 
challenged, comforted, and given hope for the future. 
Jon: Alright, we did it! In this series on how to read the Bible, we looked at all the 
styles of writing in the Bible—narrative, poetry, discourse.
Tim: And we learned how to read all of the main sections of the Bible.
Jon: This is sophisticated and beautiful literature, and I can see why the Bible is 
one of the most influential books in human history.
Tim: Yes. Every part fits into the unified story that leads to Jesus and invites us into 
a lifetime of reading and meditation. There’s a whole new world just waiting 
to be discovered in your Bible. 