Intro to Spiritual Beings
Script References
Introduction 
Jon: If you pick up the Bible, you don’t have to read far before you meet the 
main character, God.1 
Tim: Yeah. He appears in the Bible’s first sentence. And then later on page one, 
you meet the humans.2
Jon: And there you have it. The two main players in the Bible—God and humans 
on the stage of our world.
Tim: Well, not quite. In the Bible, there’s actually a way bigger cast of characters 
than just humans and God.
Jon: Like who?
Tim: I mean the figures called the elohim  in the Hebrew Scriptures—angels, the 
Satan, demons. They’re all over the story.
Jon: Oh right, spiritual beings. To be honest, I’ve never really known what to do 
with them. It’s all kind of weird.
Tim: And unfortunately, almost all of our modern conceptions about these 
beings are based on serious misunderstandings.
Jon: Alright, so let’s talk about spiritual beings in the story of the Bible.
God Creates the World
Tim: So first thing we have to do is reorient ourselves to how the ancient 
biblical authors saw the world. On pages one and two of Genesis, God 
brings order to a watery wilderness,3  separating the skies above from the 
land below.4
Jon: Right. This is earth, where we live. And then there’s the heavens, high 
above, which they saw as God’s domain.00:00-00:45
1. Genesis 1:1
2. Genesis 1:26-28
00:46–01:15
3. Genesis 1:2
4. Genesis 1:6-10Tim: But in the Bible, these spaces are not separate—they overlap. And in fact, 
the garden of Eden is described throughout the Bible as a high mountain-
garden, where heaven and earth are one.5
Jon: Cool.
God Creates Creatures 
Tim: So that’s the world. Now it needs some creatures. God first creates and 
appoints the sun, moon, and stars to rule the day and night.6
Jon: You mean the giant flaming gas balls in the sky?
Tim: Well, that’s how you think about them. But the biblical authors, like all 
ancient people, saw them as heavenly creatures that are glorious, shining 
bright, and high above .7
Jon: Which is strange. I don’t think of stars as creatures.
Tim: Well, you don’t. But for the biblical authors, the stars formed their 
categories for thinking and talking about a spiritual reality that exists 
alongside ours. And it’s a different kind of reality, just like the sky is 
different from the land. And it’s populated with creatures that have 
different kinds of bodies —shiny, spiritual bodies.
Jon: Okay, so almost all ancient cultures thought of the stars as divine beings, 
including the ancient Israelites.
Tim: But the biblical authors made clear that these beings are not God. Rather, 
they’re images of God. Their glory and high status is a reflection of the 
Creator’s glory and status, and they exist to serve his purposes.8
Jon: So the stars symbolize beings who are like God’s heavenly staff team.9
God Appoints Humans 
Tim: Right. Now let’s go back, because after God appointed the heavenly hosts, 
he also appointed another type of creature.
Jon: The humans.
Tim: Yeah. In Hebrew they’re called adam , which sounds like the Hebrew word 
for dirt because that’s what they’re made of.
Jon: So glorious rulers above and hairy sapiens below.
Tim: But then comes the great twist. God tells the lowly humans that they are 
to rule all of creation. He invites them to rise above their dirty origins and 
share in God’s glory as his partners.10
Jon: So God wants to rule the world through humans and not the spiritual 
beings?5. Joel 2:1-3; 
Ezekiel 28:13-14 
01:16–02:16
6. Genesis 1:14-18
7. Job 38:4-5, 7
8. Psalm 19:1; 
Psalm 147:4; 
Isaiah 40:26; 
Deuteronomy 4:19
9. Psalm 148b-3
02:17–03:11
10. Genesis 1:27-31; 
Genesis 2:15Tim: Exactly. This is how the poet of Psalm 8 understood the stories of Genesis. 
He looked up at the stars and says:
Jon: “What is humanity that you consider him? You made him lower than the 
spiritual beings but crowned him with glory and divine majesty.”11
Tim: This is humanity’s high calling, to rule creation in the love and power of 
God.
Jon: Very cool.
The Bad Guys 
Tim: But not everyone’s happy. We’re introduced to a spiritual being who 
doesn’t want humans to rule. So he tricks them into thinking that they can 
get divine power on their own terms.12
Jon: They’re deceived, and they take the opportunity.13
Tim: So they’re banished from the Eden mountain, exiled to wander the earth 
and return to the dust.14
Jon: This snake is bad news.
Tim: Yeah, and as you read on, you discover that he’s part of a spiritual rebellion 
that follows the humans outside of Eden. And things get worse from here.15
Jon: The humans still desire to rule, so they start a new project.16
Tim: Yes. In the Bible this is called Babylon. It’s the anti-Eden, where human and 
spiritual rebels join together to elevate themselves back to their former 
glory.
Series Overview 
Tim: And so with all that in mind, we can now appreciate the full cast of 
characters that we meet in the biblical story.
Jon: God, and humans, and all of the spiritual beings.
Tim: Exactly, and so here’s a preview of what we’re going to explore. We’ll learn 
more about God’s heavenly staff team, called the Divine Council. Then, 
we’ll talk about angels and cherubim, key figures in the spiritual realm, 
and then one particular angel called the Angel of the Lord. We’ll also look 
at the spiritual rebels in the Bible connected with the Satan and demons. 
And finally, we’ll see how this whole story leads to Jesus, the one who 
overcomes evil and reunites heaven and earth, so that a new humanity can 
partner with God.11. Psalm 8:4a, 5
03:12–03:53
12. Genesis 3:1-5
13. Genesis 3:6-7
14. Genesis 3:16-24
15. Genesis 4:8, 23; 6:5
16. Genesis 11:1-9
03:54–04:34Credits 
Jon: You just watched a video introducing spiritual beings in the story of the 
Bible.
Tim: And what’s fascinating is how they all belong to a class of beings that in 
Hebrew are called elohim . This is a hard word to translate, and so that’s 
what we’re going to explore next.04:35–05:15