Visual Commentary: Isaiah 61
Script References
00:00-01:00 Introduction
Jon:  The scroll of Isaiah is the first of three major prophets in the Bible.
Tim:  And in Isaiah chapter 61, the prophet offers a vision of a restored world 
where the land is full of abundance and full of right relationships 
between people. The final lines of the poem describe Israel as a new 
garden of Eden.
“For as the land brings out its sprouts  
And as a garden makes sprout its seed-plants,  
So the Lord Yahweh will make sprout righteousness  
And praise before all the nations.”
Jon:  That sounds great. But Israel, at this time, has been conquered and ruled 
by other kingdoms. They’ve been reduced to a powerless nation full of 
grief and mourning.
Tim:  But among those mourning Israelites, there was a small group that never 
lost hope in God’s promise. And so this poem is written to encourage 
that group of people. The poem is written in three main sections, which 
themselves all have three sections. 
Jon:  Okay. Let’s go through it.
New Creation Through the Messiah
Jon:  It begins,
“The Spirit of the Lord, Yahweh, is upon me  
Because Yahweh has anointed me;”
Tim:  So the speaker calls himself “the anointed,” from the Hebrew  
word “ mashiach .” 
Jon:  Mashiach —that’s where we get the word “messiah.”01:01-02:21Tim:  Yeah, exactly. And this Messiah says that through God’s Spirit, he’s going 
to bring seven acts of new creation. The first is to bring “good news to the 
oppressed,” and then to "bind up the brokenhearted," and then to "release 
captives" and those who are bound up—liberation!
And then, right at the center of these seven acts, the Messiah says that 
he will proclaim “the year of Yahweh’s favor.”  This is a reference to an 
ancient Israelite practice, the year of Jubilee.1
Jon:  Oh right, the Jubilee. It is meant to happen every seven times seven 
years—where everything resets. Slaves and prisoners gain freedom,  
all debts are canceled, families receive back their ancestral land. 
Tim:  Yeah. This radical practice is a sign that points forward to the renewed 
creation, like the cosmic Jubilee. 
Jon:  So why is the Jubilee also called “a day of vengeance?”
Tim:  Well, if you set everything right, that involves reversing everything that’s 
wrong. And for those who benefit from oppression or from unjust social 
arrangements, the cosmic Jubilee might feel more like retribution than 
restoration. It all depends on how you respond to the cosmic judge. 
New Priestly Garments
Tim:  Now back to the list. For those who are being oppressed, this day will 
bring comfort to those who mourn (that’s the fifth act). And then the last 
two acts describe how the Messiah will give these people new clothes.
Jon:  New clothes? Why clothes?
Tim:  Well, not just any clothes—priestly garments! There’s a crown-like turban, 
garments of praise, and then anointing oil. 
Jon:  Like the oil used to anoint the Messiah. 
Tim:  Yeah. The Messiah is duplicating himself, clothing a crew of anointed ones, 
who are going to share his mission to spread the life of the new Eden. In 
fact, look at the next thing that he says about them.
Jon:  “And they will be called  
Oaks of righteousness,  
The planting of Yahweh  
For a display of beauty.”
Jon:  That’s a beautiful image.
Tim:  It is—just like the garden imagery the poem began with. And this takes us 
into the middle section of the poem, which is all about the role that these 
anointed ones will have in the world to bring restoration.02:22-03:161. Leviticus 25The Rebuilders of Creation
Jon:  “And they will build the ruins of old.  
They will reestablish the former deserted places,  
And they will renew the devastated cities,  
The deserted places of many generations.”
Tim:  These anointed ones are the rebuilders of creation! Now, that hopeful 
image is followed by another reversal.
Jon:  “And strangers will stand  
And they will feed your flocks,  
And sons of foreigners,  
they will be your farmers and vinedressers.”
Tim:  So instead of being slaves to other nations, like they were for 
centuries, God will turn the tables, and now those nations will 
serve the anointed ones. 
Jon:  You mean like the nations will be their slaves?
Tim:  Not quite. Look at these next lines.
Tim:  The imagery is not about a master ruling slaves. “But you will be called 
priests of Yahweh.” Priests are those who serve the nations on behalf 
of God, or as it says, “servants of our God.” They’re acting like a bridge 
between God and the people. 
Jon:  The next line says they "will eat the wealth of nations and boast in their 
riches." What’s that about? 
Tim:  Well, in Israel, the priests got their food from the sacrifices that people  
brought to God. In other words, they lived off of the abundance of the 
whole community.  
Jon:  So these new cosmic priests are benefiting from the abundance of 
all the nations. 
Tim:  Exactly. Now, let’s look at the next lines that talk more about this reversal.
A Blessing to the Nations
Tim:  “In the place of shame, there will be a double portion.”  They’ll go from 
insult to joy, and from the wilderness to the Eden land. And “everlasting joy  
will be theirs.”
Jon:  That’s a lot of joy.
Tim:  It’s like the ultimate new creation. Now, in the final part of this middle 
section, God himself speaks up.
Jon:  “For I, Yahweh, love justice,  
I hate robbery and injustice.” 03:17-04:36
04:37-05:34Tim:  God’s reminding them of his character. God is for justice.
Jon:  “And I will give their reward with faithfulness,  
And I will cut an everlasting covenant with them. ”
Tim:  This is the covenant that God made with Israel to bless the nations. 
That’s what God is being faithful to.
Jon:  “And their seed will be known among the nations,  
And their offspring in the midst of the peoples.  
All those who see them will recognize them,  
That they are seed whom Yahweh has blessed.”
Tim:  So this is the seed that is going to become a new garden, bringing 
life to the world. 
A Great Wedding Feast
Tim:  Now we get to the third and final part of the poem. It concludes with the 
Messiah celebrating what Yahweh is doing in the world.
Jon:  “I will rejoice greatly in Yahweh;  
My being will shout for joy in my God. ”
Tim:  And then he describes why he’s rejoicing, with the clothing images that 
link back to the beginning of the poem. This figure is clothed with new 
garments called garments of salvation, a robe of righteousness. And then 
a priestly turban is put on a bridegroom, and then he’s adorned with the 
jewelry of a bride. So the anointed one is the ultimate priest, depicted as 
both a bride and a groom getting ready for the ultimate wedding party. 
Jon:  A wedding?
Tim:  Yeah. The new creation is depicted as a great wedding feast, where God’s 
generous love is shared with all the world. 
Conclusion
Tim:  And that brings us to the garden image at the end that we read back 
at the beginning. 
Jon:  Oh, right—a garden that is sprouting seed-plants. 
Tim:  And notice this is no ordinary garden. The plants are sprouting 
righteousness. Righteousness means right relationships between people. 
And so the new creation will be a garden of renewed relationships among 
all of the nations.05:35-06:22
06:23-06:50