Torah Series: Leviticus 
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: The book of Leviticus. We know you’ve been avoiding it because it’s weird, 
so let’s fix that. 
 Now  remember, the story of the Bible began with humans in God’s 
presence, but they were banished because of their rebellion. 1 However, 
God wants to be in relationship with us, so he chooses one family that he 
will use to restore the world back into his presence. 2 
Tim: And so God’s presence comes to dwell in a tent right in the middle of 
Israel. 3
Jon: And that’s great!
Tim: But it creates a problem. Because it’s so intense that Moses can’t go in, 
and other priests who enter inappropriately, they die. 4 
God’s Holiness  
Jon: Wait. If God’s presence is good, how is it all of a sudden dangerous for 
people?
Tim: So think of it this way. God’s presence is like the sun. It’s pure power and 
goodness, and when something mortal and corruptible gets close to such 
pure power, it’s destroyed. And so the word “holiness” is used in Leviticus 
to describe God’s pure and powerful presence, which, like the sun, is both 
good and dangerous. So the point of Leviticus is to show how corrupt 
Israelites can live near God’s goodness without being destroyed. 
 Now,  in the book, there are three ways for how this is all going to work out. 
And these are going to seem strange to you, but just hang in there with us. 
Jon: The first one is rituals, the second is this idea of the priesthood, and the 
third is a bunch of purity laws.  00:00–00:34
1. Genesis 1-3
2. Genesis 12
3. Exodus 40:1-38
4. Exodus 40:35
00:35–01:22Rituals  
Tim: Now, the book is broken up into seven sections. And each solution is 
explored in two sections of the book. The rituals are here, the priests are 
here, and the purity laws go here. 
Jon: Now, the first solution, rituals, involves a lot of animal sacrifices. And 
so Leviticus begins with detailed instructions for how to make these 
sacrifices. 5 Some are ways of saying thank you to God, and others are 
simply ways of saying, “I’m sorry.”
Tim: And here at the end of the book, 6 there are some more rituals. These are 
about observing sacred days and festivals. They’re all celebrations that 
retell some part of the story of how God rescued Israel and set them apart 
from the nations.
The Priesthood  
Jon: The second solution to the holiness problem has to do with priests. You 
see, being directly in God’s presence is really dangerous, so he appoints 
priests as special representatives who can go into his presence on behalf 
of others.
Tim: And so in this section, 7 we have a story about how the priests are ordained 
into the priesthood. And then the other section 8 explains this set of higher 
standards the priests have to live by because they work so closely to God’s 
presence.  
Purity Laws  
Jon:  The third solution in the book is all about purity laws, and this is by far 
the hardest thing to understand. For example, in this section, we’re really 
concerned with knowing whether you are “clean” or “unclean.”
Tim: Or another way of saying that is being “pure” and “impure.” Here’s what we 
need to know to understand this. When you are in a pure state, you can 
be near God’s presence. When you are in an impure state, you can’t. And 
so it was really important for Israelites to know what state they’re in at any 
given moment.
Jon: So the first thing we have is a list of pure and impure animals. 9
Tim:  Yeah. This list of animals is divided up by where they live, so on the 
land, in the sea, in the air. And the text is just not clear about why certain 
animals are impure or why touching or eating them makes you impure. 
What is clear, however, is that avoiding these creatures will set Israel apart 
and it will remind them that God’s own holiness should affect every part of 
their lives, including what they eat. 
Jon: After the food laws we get a lot of random rules about things like skin 
disease, touching dead bodies, what to do with bodily fluids. 1001:23–02:01
5. Leviticus 1-7
6. Leviticus 23-27
02:02–02:28
7. Leviticus 8-10
8. Leviticus 21-22
02:29–04:21
9. Leviticus 11
10. Leviticus 12-15Tim: But they’re not random. All of these are things that the Israelites 
associated with life and death, which are sacred things because God is the 
author of life. 
Jon: Okay, but simply coming into contact with these things makes you 
impure?
Tim: They do, but we have to keep in mind that it’s not wrong or sinful to be 
ritually impure. You just wait a few days, take a bath, offer a sacrifice, and 
you’re pure again. What is inappropriate is entering into God’s presence 
when you’re in an impure state.
Jon:  Now, there’s more purity laws over here in this section. 11 
Tim: Yeah. These focus on Israel’s moral behaviour. So these are laws about 
social justice, healthy relationships, having sexual integrity. Living by these 
laws will make Israel into a morally pure people who can live near God’s 
presence. 12 
The Day of Atonement  
Jon: Those are the three solutions. Now, you’ve probably noticed that they 
surround the very center of this book. 13 And it’s here that we find a really 
important ritual called the Day of Atonement. 
Tim: Yeah. So Israel’s a big tribe now, and odds are there’s a lot of sin happening 
that goes unnoticed, that people aren’t dealing with. So one time a year, 
the priests would take two goats, and one of those goats is killed and its 
blood is carried right into God’s presence where it symbolically covers, or 
atones for, Israel’s sin.
Jon: Yeah. That’s kind of weird.
Tim: Well, the meaning of the sacrifice is explained in the next chapter where 
God says that the blood of a creature is its life, and so this goat’s life is 
offered as a substitute. It’s receiving God’s punishment for Israel’s sin so 
that the people don’t have to. 
Jon:  That leaves the second goat.
Tim:  Yeah. The priest puts his hands on it, and then he confesses all the sins 
of Israel. It’s like he’s placing the sins on the goat. And then that goat gets 
cast out forever into the wilderness. It's called the scapegoat.
Jon: Yeah. I’ve heard that word before.
Tim: Yeah. It’s a very powerful image of how God is graciously removing Israel’s 
sin. 11. Leviticus 18-20
12. Leviticus 4:24
04:22–05:29
13. Leviticus 16-17The Meaning of Sacrifices  
Jon: But let's be honest, sacrifices in general seem so barbaric.
Tim: We have to remember that in the ancient world sacrifices were the main 
way of buying favor from the gods. But the problem was that those same 
gods are unpredictable. They’re fickle—you never know if they’re going 
to ignore you. Are they going to turn on you? And so it is in this cultural 
setting that we see Israel’s God as totally different. He does get angry 
about human corruption, but it is never arbitrary. And he loves people, so 
he provides this clear way for Israel to know with confidence that they are 
forgiven and that, despite their corruption, they are safe to live near his 
presence. And so that makes the book of Leviticus actually a revolutionary 
statement in its day.
Jon:  So that’s Leviticus, but Israel is still at Mount Sinai in the middle of the 
wilderness. They need a place to live.
Tim: Yes, the land God promised to Abraham. And so the journey to that land is 
what the next book of the Bible is all about.05:30–06:30