Witness 
Script References
Introduction  
When you hear the word "witness," you might think of someone who sees 
something shocking or important and then shares their testimony with others. 
The word "witness" is used like this in the Bible too. But here’s what’s really 
fascinating. This word actually helps us understand the entire storyline of 
Scripture.
In the Bible, a witness is basically someone who sees something important 
or amazing. In Hebrew, this person is an eid and in Greek a mártus . And if this 
person begins to share what they’ve seen, we call this “bearing witness,” in 
Hebrew, uwd, and in Greek, marturéo .
Witness in the Bible
So in the story of Ruth, when Boaz buys land from Naomi’s family, he calls 
together witnesses to see the transaction. So that if there’s a later dispute 
about the land, they can bear witness about what they saw. 1 
So that’s the basic meaning of the word "witness." Now, if we follow this idea 
throughout the Bible, we learn that God wants a group of witnesses—people 
who see and experience him—to uwd, or represent, him to the world.  
The Israelites Bear Witness  
So beginning with the story of the Exodus, the people of Israel witness Yahweh 
as the powerful King of the nations when he rescues them from slavery. 2 Then 
he appoints this one nation to bear witness, or uwd, to the rest of the nations 
about what they experienced. 3 He calls them a kingdom of priests, or people 
who connect all other nations to Yahweh, the true God and King. 
But there’s a big problem. The Israelites aren’t good witnesses. In fact, they 
start worshiping other gods. 4 So God raises up a chief witness, Moses, to uwd, 
or bear witness, to the people who are supposed to be the real witnesses.00:00–00:36
00:37–01:02
1. Ruth 4:9
01:03–01:56
2. Exodus 7-15
3. Exodus 19:4-6
4. Exodus 32When Moses meets with Yahweh on Mount Sinai, he sees and experiences God 
face to face. When he comes down, he uwds —he bears witness—to the people 
about his experience. He even writes a song as a witness so that they would 
never forget how God has cared for and rescued them. 5
The Prophets as Witnesses 
But as the story goes on, Israel does forget. They fail to truly see God, so they 
fail as his witnesses. So God raises up prophets, who are like Moses, to uwd—to 
open their eyes to who their God really is. Like Isaiah, he has a vision of God 
as the cosmic King. 6 And he’s sent to uwd—to bear witness—to the Israel of his 
day because they’re blind, they’re corrupt, and they don’t recognize God as 
their King. 7
So Isaiah says that one day God will raise up the ultimate chief witness—a 
figure called the servant. He will open the eyes of the blind so that they can 
truly see Yahweh and bear witness to the nations that their God is the King who 
will rescue the world. 8
Jesus and his Companions 
And now, when we turn to the story of Jesus, we find him claiming to be that 
servant and witness spoken of by Isaiah. 9 He is the ultimate witness, or in 
Greek, the mártus . Crowds of people witness him saying that he’s bringing 
God’s Kingdom—that it’s here, right now, through him. They see Jesus healing 
people, even restoring sight to the blind. 10
Many recognize who he is and respond to his message. But many others still 
refuse to truly see. Even the nation’s leaders won’t listen to him. Rather, they kill 
Jesus for bearing witness to God’s Kingdom, that is, for being a mártus . In fact, 
this is where the word "martyr" comes from.
But then, after Jesus’ death, something amazing happens! Jesus’ friends see 
him alive from the dead, and they recognize that he is the divine King—Yahweh 
himself—who has come to rescue the world. 11 After that, Jesus sends them out 
to marturéo , that is, to bear witness to the nations—to open their eyes to this 
risen King who has conquered death and who offers freedom and rescue and 
the hope of a new creation. 12
Conclusion
And it’s this story about Jesus that’s been spread all around the world by 
faithful witnesses. And to this day, when someone hears the story of Jesus and 
experiences the love of God for all humanity, the most natural thing to do is to 
simply bear witness. 5. Deuteronomy 32
01:57–02:36
6. Isaiah 6
7. Isaiah 42:18-19,  
 43:10-12
8. Isaiah 42:6, 49:6
02:27–03:42
9. Luke 4:17-21
10.  Mark 8:22-26
11. Luke 24
12. Acts 1:8, 13:47
03:43–04:00