Shema: Strength 
Script References
Introduction  
For thousands of years, every morning and evening, Jewish people have  
prayed these well-known words as a way of expressing their devotion to  
God, they’re called the Shema. 
“Hear O Israel, the LORD is our God, the Lord is one, and as for you, you shall  
love the LORD your God with all of your heart, with all your soul, and with all  
your strength.”1  
We’re going to look at the last word, strength.
The Hebrew Word Me’od  
The Hebrew word is me’od, and it occurs some 300 times in the Scriptures,  
and it doesn’t actually mean “strength.” There is a perfectly good word for  
strength in Hebrew (koakh), and me’od is not it. In fact, the Shema is one of  
the only places in the whole Bible where me’od is translated as strength.  
So what’s up with that?
The most common meaning of me’od is “very” or “much.” It’s what grammar  
nerds call an adverb, a word that comes alongside other words to augment  
their meaning. 
For example, in Genesis chapter 1, God looks at the world he’s made and six  
times he calls it good. But then, the climactic seventh time, he says it is  
me’od good,2   that is, “very  good.” Later in Genesis, in the story of Noah, the  
flood waters keep rising and they become me’od powerful, or extremely   
powerful over the land.3   In the story of Cain and Abel, Cain wasn’t just angry 00:00–00:23
1. Deuteronomy 6:4-5
00:24–01:31
2. Genesis 1:31
3. Genesis 7:18at his brother, he was me’od angry.4   Or when Saul became the king of  
Israel, he was me’od happy.5  
So you can see why me’od occurs hundreds of times in the Bible. It’s a really  
common Hebrew word that intensifies the meaning of other words,  
“very this” or “really that.”
Me’od  in the Hebrew Bible 
However, biblical authors could use me’od in ways that are unique. Like  
when they want to increase a word’s force to total capacity, they’ll say me’od   
twice. So Jacob became me’od me’od wealthy, with flocks and camels and  
donkeys and servants.6   Or the Israelite spies went to investigate the  
promised land, and they say, “the land we passed through is me’od me’od   
good.”7  
So it’s pretty clear me’od doesn’t mean strength in terms of muscle power  
but rather “very” or “much.” Now let’s come back to the Shema, where 
people are called to love God with all of their heart, that is, their will and 
affections, and with all their soul, that is, their whole life and physical being,  
and with all their me’od, that is, with all of their “muchness.” And while that  
sounds kind of funny, you also kind of get it. 
If me’od can intensify any word’s meaning to total capacity, then this final  
thing that you use to love God isn’t a thing at all. It’s actually everything.  
Loving God with your me’od means devoting every possibility, opportunity,  
and capacity that you have to honoring God and loving your neighbor as  
yourself. It’s the most wide and expansive word in the Shema. Me’od can  
refer to almost anything.
Different Interpretations of Me’od   
Which raises one last and really fascinating point. Because this word was  
capable of many nuances of meaning, ancient Jewish communities 
interpreted me’od of the Shema in different ways. 
So the ancient Jewish scholars who translated the Hebrew Bible into Greek,  
when they came to me’od in the Shema, they translated it with the Greek  
word dunamis, that is, “power” or “strength". This is the interpretation  
adopted by most modern translations.
But if you look at the ancient Aramaic translations of the Hebrew Bible, you’ll  
discover that these scholars interpreted me’od to mean “wealth.” Money is a  4. Genesis 4:5
5. 1 Samuel 11:15
01:32–02:44
6. Genesis 30:43
7. Numbers 14:7
02:45–04:12concrete thing that opens up all kinds of opportunities to love God by  
giving away resources. 
And when Jesus was asked about the most important command in  
Scripture, he quoted the Shema, and he used two words to unpack the  
meaning of me’od. He said to “love God with all your mind and with all your  
power.” 8  Both are human capacities that can be used to love God in an  
infinite number of ways.
So which one of these interpretations of me’od is right? Does it mean 
strength or wealth or mind? That’s the wrong question. The word me’od  
doesn’t limit the number of ways you can show love for God. Just the 
opposite! The point is that everything in a person’s life, every moment and  
every opportunity, every ability and capacity offers a chance to love and  
honor the one who made you. It’s a call to love God with all of your 
“muchness.” And that’s the meaning of strength in the Shema.8. Mark 12:30