  1New Testament Letters:  
Historical Context
SCRIPT REFERENCES
INTRODUCTION 00:00-00:41
Tim: Near the end of the Bible are twenty-one letters written to communities of 
Jesus’ followers throughout the ancient Roman empire. 
Jon: Letters? Like I’m reading someone’s mail?
Tim: Yeah! The letters are written by the apostles, that is, the people that Jesus 
appointed to spread the good news about his Kingdom. And they wrote to 
Jesus’ followers living in different cities around the Roman world. These let -
ters were all written in a style called prose discourse. 
Jon: Now, if I’m reading a letter that wasn’t written to me, then there’s likely a lot of 
background information that’s assumed but not mentioned. 
Tim: Yeah, exactly. And the letters in the Bible are no different. 
Jon: Okay, so let’s talk about how to read the New Testament letters in historical 
context.  2LEVEL OF CONTEXT 1: THE LETTERS IN THE ENTIRE BIBLICAL STORY    00:42-01:49
Tim: So there are three levels of historical context to keep in mind when reading 
the New Testament letters. The first is how all the letters fit into the larger 
storyline of the Scriptures.
Jon: Right. So this story begins with God creating humanity as his partners to rule 
creation with him.1 But we choose to rule on our own terms, leading to vio -
lence, exile, and death.2 
Tim: But God promises a guy named Abraham that life and blessing will spread 
to all nations through him and his descendants to renew God’s vision for 
humanity.3
Jon: And Jesus said he came to bring that promise to its fulfillment through his life, 
death, and resurrection.4
Tim: Right. And so the apostles saw themselves as heralds, announcing the arrival 
of God’s Kingdom in Jesus,5 like the apostle Paul when he wrote to the house 
churches in Rome about the good news. He said his job was to summon 
people of all nations to give their allegiance to Jesus, the exalted king of the 
world.6
Jon: That’s a bold thing to say to people living in the capital city of the Roman 
empire, whose allegiance is supposed to be to Caesar. 
LEVEL OF CONTEXT 2: LIFE IN THE ROMAN EMPIRE    01:50-03:02
Tim: Yeah. And that actually brings us to the second important context for under -
standing the New Testament letters, the culture of the Roman Empire in the 
first century. 
1. Genesis 1-2
2. Genesis 3
3. Genesis 12:1-34. Mark 1:14-15, Matthew 26:63-64
5. Acts 1:8
6. Romans 1:1-6  3Jon: So Rome ruled all of these territories around the Mediterranean Sea.
Tim: And they built their empire by conquering and enslaving their enemies and 
then imposing heavy taxes. The emperor and his small circle controlled all of 
the power and wealth, and they knew how to deal with people who threat -
ened the social order. 
Jon: Most people lived without much money or stability. 
Tim: And Roman culture had a very clear hierarchy. Men from important families 
with money and education could move ahead in society. But women, slaves, 
children, and the poor were always at a disadvantage and treated as inferior.
Jon: Yet in a community of people who follow Jesus, everyone was treated with 
love and equal dignity.7 
Tim: Yeah. In Roman life, it was unheard of for people of high status to associate 
with people below them. But the apostles said that through Jesus, God had 
given the gift of his love to everyone without regard to their status.8
Jon: So in that context, these letters were counter-cultural and they broke down 
barriers between people.
LEVEL OF CONTEXT 3: THE SITUATIONAL CONTEXT FOR THE LETTERS    03:03-04:52
Tim: Exactly, and so that brings us to the last level of context, the situational con -
text of each letter. 
Jon: You mean the specific issues in the church of a city that prompted the writing 
of the letter in the first place. 
Tim: Yeah, like Paul’s letter to the Christians in Rome. It’s tempting to read this let -
ter and focus on all the important theology and then overlook why he wrote 
this letter.
7. Ephesians 5:21-6:9 8. Romans 3:22-23  4Jon: Why did he write it?
Tim: Well towards the end, he talks about how Jewish food laws and sacred days 
have become controversial between Jewish and non-Jewish followers of Je -
sus.
Jon: Which was creating divisions in the church. 
Tim: And if you read carefully, you can see that some Christians with higher social 
status were treating Jewish followers of Jesus with contempt.9 
Jon: And Jewish Christians were returning the favor, condemning the non-Jews as 
second rate followers of Jesus.
Tim: Exactly, and so all of the ideas and theology in the first part of the letter were 
crafted to address those very problems. Paul acknowledges that the Roman 
Christians have big differences in culture, theology, and social status, but he 
wants them to realize that they are unified by their faith in Jesus, who is the 
real center of their church.10 
Jon: Okay. Great. But if that letter was written to someone else, then what should 
I get out of it? I don’t live in ancient Rome.
Tim: Well in these letters we see the apostles challenging and transforming every 
part of their first century culture and life with the good news about King 
Jesus. And by watching them, we gain wisdom about how that same good 
news can transform our culture as well.
Now, there’s one more helpful step to take in reading the New Testament letters, 
and that’s learning how to follow the flow of thought from the letter’s begin -
ning all the way to its end. And that’s what we’ll look at next.  
9. Romans 14:1-5; 15:1, 7; 16:17 10. Romans 15:5-7