Pentecost: Acts 1–7 
Script References
Introduction 
Tim: One of the earliest accounts about Jesus of Nazareth, his life, death, and 
resurrection, was written by a man named Luke. 
Jon: We know it as the Gospel of Luke, but Luke continued the story in a 
second volume.
Tim: Called the book of Acts, and it’s all about what Jesus continued to do after 
his resurrection.
Jon: Acts begins with the disciples, who are hanging out with Jesus, who’s just 
come back to life. Which is mind-blowing to imagine!
Tim: And then for weeks, the risen Jesus kept teaching them about his upside-
down Kingdom, the new creation that he launched through his death and 
resurrection.
Jon: This is exciting stuff! And the disciples are ready to go tell the world.
Pentecost 
Tim: But Jesus tells them to wait and to stay in Jerusalem until they receive 
a new kind of power, so they can be faithful witnesses to Jesus and his 
Kingdom. Then he says that their mission is going to begin in Jerusalem, 
then move out to Judea and Samaria, and then from there out into the 
nations.1  It’s like a roadmap for the whole book of Acts. Then the disciples 
saw Jesus enthroned as King of all creation.2 
Jon: So the disciples wait, wondering when this power is going to come, and 
then comes the time of Pentecost.
Tim: So this is an ancient Israelite festival—it’s during the early summer. 
And thousands and thousands of Jewish pilgrims would come back 
to Jerusalem from all over the world, all these different languages and 
cultures colliding in the city.
Jon: And the disciples are together in a house, which is suddenly filled with 
rushing wind, along with fire. The fire splinters off into “tongues of fire” 00:00–00:38
00:39–02:43
1. Acts 1:8
2. Acts 1:9hovering over people’s heads. What’s this all about?3  
Tim: Yeah, so Luke’s tapping into a repeated Old Testament theme. When God’s 
presence showed up similarly at Mount Sinai, he made a covenant with 
Israel and gave them the ten commandments. Then later, when God’s 
glory came in a pillar of fire, it filled the tabernacle when he came to live 
among them.4  
Jon: But that was just one pillar of fire. Not many.
Tim: Exactly. Luke is making an important point here. This is God’s personal 
temple presence, God’s Spirit, that was foretold by Israel’s prophets. And 
now it’s come to take up residence in the new temple of Jesus’ body, 
that is, his people. They’ve become little mobile temples where God now 
dwells.
Jon: And they start to tell stories about Jesus, but they’re speaking in languages 
that they didn’t know before, yet all the visitors can understand them. 
What’s this all about?
Tim: Well, Peter gets up to explain that this is the fulfillment of Israel’s hopes 
based on the Scriptures. God’s plan was always to use the unified family 
of Abraham to bring peace and justice to the world.5  But the tribes of 
Israel had been scattered because of the exile. Now here at Pentecost, 
representatives from all of the tribes come back together, and they’re 
introduced to their Messiah, the crucified and risen Jesus, so they can now 
become the restored people of Israel.
Jon: And thousands of them start following the way of Jesus.
The New Temple  
Tim: Which brings us to Luke’s tale of two temples. So you’ve got the temple 
that Herod built in Jerusalem, where Jesus’ disciples worship like the rest 
of the Israelites. But now there’s also Jesus' temple, which consists of 
people. And this temple is meeting together in homes all over Jerusalem. 
And they were approaching life in a radical new way.
Jon: Right. Think about it. Many of these pilgrims aren't even from Jerusalem, 
so they formed these new families, and they’re all depending on each 
other. 
Tim: Yeah. People would sell their stuff, provide for the poor among them. They 
ate their meals together. They said their daily prayers together.6 
Jon: They were learning from the apostles what it meant to live as if Jesus is the 
true King of the world. And it must have been exhilarating.
Tim: But it wasn’t all fun and games. Being God’s temple is serious business, 
just like in the Old Testament. So you might know about that strange 
story in the book of Leviticus about two priests who disrespect God in the 
temple and then suddenly die.7  Well Luke includes here a similar story of 3. Acts 2:1-4
4. Exodus 40
5. Genesis 12
02:44–04:06
6. Acts 2:42-47
7. Leviticus 10two disciples who dishonor God’s Spirit in this new temple, and they suffer 
a similar fate.8 
Jon: So there is corruption in the community, but the bigger problem is coming 
from the outside.
Tim: Yeah, from the other temple. Its leaders are threatened by this new 
messianic movement, and so they arrest the apostles. They try and stop 
them. And this brings us to the final story in the Jerusalem section of Acts. 
We’re introduced to a new disciple, Stephen.9 
The Martyrdom of Stephen  
Jon: Oh yeah, Stephen! He’s on fire! He steps up as a leader among the 
disciples to serve the poor. And he would go to the temple courts to teach 
people about the way of Jesus.
Tim: So the temple leaders arrest Stephen, and they find false witnesses 
to accuse him of dishonoring Moses and of being a terrorist who’s 
threatening the temple.10   
Jon: In response, Stephen gives this powerful speech about how predictable 
this whole situation was.
Tim: Yeah. He retells the whole Old Testament story, highlighting characters like 
Joseph, Moses, and the prophets, people who were consistently rejected 
and persecuted by their own people. Israel has been resisting God’s 
representatives for centuries, and so their rejection of Jesus and now of 
his followers is a rejection of God himself.11   
Jon: They get angry, and they start to execute him by picking up rocks and 
smashing him to death.
Tim: And as he’s dying, he commits himself to the way of Jesus, to suffer 
because of the sins of others. He even cries out, “Lord! Don’t hold this sin 
against them!”12  
Jon: This is basically what Jesus said at his death!13   
Tim: Exactly. Stephen becomes the first martyr of the Jesus movement, with 
many more to come. But this persecution contains seeds of hope, which is 
why Luke introduces us to a new character here, a religious leader named 
Saul. He stands over Stephen’s dead body and even approves of the whole 
thing.14  
Jon: Wait. Saul? You mean the man who becomes the apostle Paul?!
Tim: Yes! Luke is showing how even this tragic murder can’t stop Jesus’ 
Kingdom. And so many persecuted disciples scatter out of Jerusalem. 
And just as Jesus said, they head into Judea and Samaria. Now the story of 
what happens there, that’s what the next section of Acts is all about.8. Acts 5:1-11
9. Acts 6-7
04:07–05:45
10. Acts 6:8-15
11. Acts 7:1-51
12. Acts 7:60
13. Luke 23:34
14. Acts 8:1