Transgression 
Script References
Introduction  
Most people assume the Bible has a lot to say about how messed up humans 
are, and that’s true. It’s also true that the Bible’s vocabulary about this topic 
sounds odd to modern people, using words like sin, iniquity, or transgression. 
And so the Bible’s perspective on the human condition is often ignored or 
treated as ancient and backwards.
This is really unfortunate because through these words, the biblical authors 
are offering us a deeply profound diagnosis of human nature. Iniquity refers to 
behavior that’s crooked, while sin refers to moral failure. And transgression, this 
is a fascinating word that you for sure haven’t used in conversation recently. So 
let’s focus on it for a few minutes.
The Hebrew Word Pesha  
In Old Testament Hebrew, the noun is pesha and the verb is pasha. In the 
New Testament, the Greek word is paraptoma. They’re usually translated 
as “transgression,” sometimes as “rebellion,” and in older translations as 
“trespass.”
These words refer to ways that people violate the trust of others. Pesha  
describes the betrayal of a relationship. And since there are many kinds of 
relationships, a lot of different behaviors can be called pesha.
Like if two nations are in a relationship, we would call that a treaty. And pasha  
would describe the breaking of that agreement. Like in the biblical book of 2 
Kings, we read, “After the death of king Ahab, Moab pasha'd with Israel.”1  Now 
this is usually translated, “Moab rebelled against Israel.” But in biblical Hebrew, 
you don’t pasha against someone, you pasha with them, that is, you break trust 
with that person.
The same idea appears in an Old Testament law about theft.2  If an Israelite is 
away on a trip and somebody sneaks into their house and steals something, 00:00–00:43
00:44-03:26
1. 2 Kings 1:1
2. Exodus 22:7-9that’s robbery. But if the thief was your neighbor, it’s pesha because they’re 
someone you should be able to trust.
Or there’s a story about Jacob running away from Laban, his uncle. Laban 
accuses Jacob of stealing some idol statues. He searches all of Jacob’s 
belongings, and he finds nothing. So Jacob shouts, “What is my pesha?!”3   
How have I violated your trust? But the sad irony is that the statues were stolen 
by Jacob’s wife, who is Laban’s own daughter. Talk about breaking trust!
So pesha involves one person or group violating a relationship of trust with 
another. And this is a really common word in the Bible because it’s one long 
story about a broken relationship between God and the Israelites. At Mount 
Sinai, they agreed to worship only their God and to care for the poor among 
them, but they didn’t. And so God raised up prophets to confront them, like 
Micah who said, “I am full of power, with the Spirit of the Lord and with justice 
and courage, so I can declare to Jacob his pesha.” 4 
Or the prophet Amos, he accused the Israelites of pesha, specifically for 
idolatry and “selling the poor for a pair of sandals.”5  He also accused other 
nations, like Tyre who profited from capturing whole towns and then selling 
them into slavery,6  or the Ammonites for murdering the innocent to enlarge 
their borders.7  
For Amos these are all acts of pesha. They violate the universal trust that exists 
between all humans who are made in the image of God. He watched these 
leaders ignore or justify the mistreatment of humans in the name of national 
security or a strong economy. But for Amos, it was a betrayal of humanity. And 
it makes perfect sense why these prophets associate pesha with words like 
treachery8  or falsehood.9
The Greek Word Paraptoma 
In the Greek New Testament, the apostle Paul develops this portrait of humans 
as trust-breakers using the word paraptoma. He recalls the story in Genesis 
about adam (it means “humanity” in Hebrew). And in that story, humanity 
breaks trust with God and seizes authority to discern good and evil on their 
own terms. Paul calls this the paraptoma of adam, humanity’s violation of trust 
with God and with each other. And it leads to a complicated web of betrayed 
and broken relationships, leading toward violence and death. 
But for Paul, that is not the last word. He said, “If death came to all by the 
paraptoma of a human, how much more will God’s gracious gift overflow to 
many by means of a human, Jesus the Messiah.”10 
Instead of letting humanity destroy itself in treachery, God raised up a human 
who would allow our pasha to do its worst to him. Here Paul is drawing on the 
prophet Isaiah’s portrait of the suffering servant, the one who would “commit 
no violence, or have any treachery on his lips,” yet he would be “counted 3. Genesis 31:36
4. Micah 3:8
5. Amos 2:6
6. Amos 1:9
7. Amos 1:13
9. Hosea 7:138. Isaiah 59:12
03:27-04:35
10. Romans 5:15among those who pasha ... bearing their failures, and interceding on their 
behalf.”11 
Jesus Takes on Our Pesha/Paraptoma  
And this is the surprising story of the Bible, that God’s response to humanity’s 
pasha and paraptoma was to be trustworthy on our behalf. The apostles 
claim that, in Jesus, God took responsibility for our betrayal, so that he could 
open up a new future and a new way to be human, the way of faithfulness, 
trustworthiness, and integrity. That’s the kind of human Jesus was and is. And 
it’s the kind of humans he wants to create as he faithfully guides our world into 
the new creation. 
And that’s the fascinating story behind our biblical words for transgression. 11. Isaiah 53:9, 12
04:36-05:15