Wisdom Series: Proverbs
Script References
Introduction 
Jon: There are three books in the Bible that have come to be called the wisdom 
literature, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and Job.
Tim: And all of these books are addressing the same set of questions. What 
kind of world are we living in? And what does it look like to live well  
in this world?
Jon: So, how to be good at life? 
Tim: Yeah. So each of these books tackles these questions from a unique 
perspective, and it’s important to understand all of them to get a fully 
biblical perspective on the good life. So, as a thought experiment, you 
could actually imagine each of these books as a person. So Proverbs 
would be like this brilliant young teacher, and Ecclesiastes, a sharp  
middle-aged critic, and Job would be this weathered old man who’s seen a 
lot in his day.
The Brilliant Young Teacher 
Jon: We’re going to start by meeting the book of Proverbs, the brilliant young 
teacher. And she’s not just smart, she’s smart about everything—work, 
relationships, sex, spirituality. She has incredible insights—things you 
wouldn’t see on your own.
Tim:  Yeah. She would be the perfect friend to have around when you need 
really specific advice.
Jon:  So what makes her so smart? 
Tim: Well, Proverbs can see things that most people don’t see. She believes 
that there is an invisible creative force in the universe that can guide 
people in how they should live. And you can’t see it, just like you can’t see 
gravity, but it affects everything that we do. 
Jon: So what’s this force? 00:00–00:42
00:43–01:18Hokhmah, Lady Wisdom, and the Fear of the Lord 
Tim:  Well, in Hebrew it’s called hokhmah, and it usually gets translated into 
English as "wisdom." It’s an attribute of God that God used to create the 
world, and hokhmah has been woven into the fabric of things and how 
they work. So wherever people are making good or just or wise decisions, 
they are tapping into hokhmah.
Jon: And whenever someone’s making a bad decision, they’re working  
against hokhmah.
Tim: Right, or as it says in Proverbs chapter 1, “The waywardness of fools will 
destroy them, but the one who listens to wisdom lives in security.”1  
Jon: So it’s like a moral law of the universe? 
Tim: Yeah. It’s a cause-effect pattern and no one can escape it. And Proverbs 
personifies all of this as a woman. 
Jon:  Yeah, Lady Wisdom.
Tim: Right, and she roams around the earth calling out and making herself 
available to anyone who is willing to listen to her and to learn, which 
leads to the second thing Proverbs believes—that anyone can access and 
interact with wisdom and use it to make a beautiful life for yourself  
or for others.
Jon: You can create with it like a designer?
Tim: Yes. In fact, hokhmah in Hebrew isn’t simply intellectual knowledge. The 
word is also used to describe a skilled artisan who excels at their craft, like 
woodworking or stone masonry. So you show you possess hokhmah when 
you put it to work and develop the skill of making a good life. 
Jon: Okay. That makes sense. So let’s do this. Let’s go find some wisdom.
Tim: But before you do, Proverbs has one more really important thing to 
consider. Hokhmah isn’t some impersonal force—it’s an attribute of God 
himself. And so in Hebrew thought, your journey to becoming wise has 
to begin with what Proverbs calls “the fear of the Lord.”2   It’s this healthy 
respect for God’s definition of good and evil, and true wisdom means 
learning those boundary lines and not crossing them. 
Wisdom Applied in a Collection of Sayings  
Jon: Now, all those ideas you just unpacked are in chapters 1 through 9 of 
Proverbs. But when I think of the book of Proverbs, I think of the collection 
of sayings—the proverbs themselves. Tell me about those.01:19–03:09
1. Proverbs 1:32
2. Proverbs 1:7
03:10–04:30Tim: Yeah. Those are what you find in chapters 10 on to the end of the book. 
It’s a collection of hundreds and hundreds of proverbs about any and all 
aspects of life, and hokhmah gets applied to them, resulting in this wise 
guidance to help you find the path toward success in no matter  
what you do.
Jon: If I design my life with these sayings, life is going to be good.
Tim: Yeah. Or as Proverbs puts it, “It will give health to your bones, prosperity,  
a long, rich life.”3  
Jon: Which is a really big claim. 
Tim: But you can see how it’s often the case. Wise people, they tend to do 
better—things usually work out well for them in life. And so that is the 
promise and the wisdom of the book of Proverbs. 
Jon: The book of Proverbs is really beautiful, but if we take a step back, some 
people would argue it’s a little too simplistic. Because sometimes horrible 
things happen to really wise people, and sometimes foolish people get 
rewarded. It doesn’t always work the way we think it should work. 
Tim: That’s right, which is why we need to go and listen to our next wise friend, 
Ecclesiastes the critic. Because he’s wrestled with that very problem, and 
he’s going to push us further in our journey to find the good life.3. Proverbs 3:8