Public Reading of Scripture
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: I was reading the Bible, which, you know, is kind of hard to do. But I came 
across this verse that says, “Devote yourself to the public reading of 
Scripture, to preaching and teaching.”
Tim: Yeah. This is in Paul’s letter to Timothy, who’s a young pastor. And he’s 
telling him about ways that he can keep his community engaged with 
Scripture.
Jon: Okay, so preaching the Bible, I get. Teaching from the Bible, I get that too. 
But what about this reading Scripture together thing? Is that something 
I’m supposed to care about? Why did Paul think it was so important?
An Ancient Practice  
Tim: Oh man, for Paul, this was a really significant practice for the people 
of God. Think all the way back to Mount Sinai where the Israelites were 
just rescued from Egypt. They’re no longer slaves, and they need a new 
identity, a new story to live by. And so Moses, he gathers the people 
together, and he reads the Scriptures aloud. He reminds them of where 
they came from, who they are, and the new future that they’re called to 
live for.
Jon: This was the first public reading of Scripture in the Bible.
Tim: Yeah, and it didn’t stop there. When the people finally got into the land, 
they did it again. Joshua pulled the people together, and they all listened 
to the Scriptures read aloud, so they could remember where they came 
from and how they could keep living as a part of this new story.
Jon: So this is something they did all the time then.
Tim: Well, actually no. After Joshua died, we don’t have any more stories of the 
people coming together to hear God’s word. Instead the people forgot 
their story, and a whole generation arose that didn’t know their God or 
what God had done for them. 00:00–00:31
00:32–01:28Public Reading as Remembering  
Tim: But then, centuries later, a king named Josiah rediscovered the Scriptures, 
and he was so excited that he called Israel to begin this practice once 
again. It sparked a renewal movement, that is, until the people forgot once 
more and they ended up in exile.
 And so this is why when Ezra and Nehemiah came back from the exile, 
they needed to remind the people who they are and how they are to live.
Jon: So this is a powerful practice.
Tim: Yeah. In fact, reading Scripture together became a core part of Jewish 
life. It was done every week as they gathered in synagogue. Jesus himself 
participated in this practice. He even launched his mission during the 
weekly reading of the Scriptures. He read from the scroll of Isaiah, and 
then he told everyone these words were about him.
 And that brings us all the way back to the early Church, where Paul told 
Timothy to keep this practice going, to immerse the whole community in 
the story of the Scriptures.
Reading as a Community  
Jon: Okay, but here’s the thing. Most people back then didn’t know how to 
read, so they had to do it publically. But I can read the Bible by myself.
Tim: Yeah, and you should totally do that. But don’t underestimate the power of 
this ancient practice. Reading the Bible by yourself can be hard. It could 
be easy to get distracted. But something happens when you hear God’s 
word read aloud and when you’re with other people. And besides, it’s 
really easy. You don’t need anyone to preach or teach, you just need to 
listen to the Scriptures, and then talk about what you have heard.
 This is what God’s people have always done when they enter into new and 
uncertain times. They remember their story and who they are through the 
public reading of the Scriptures.01:29–02:20
02:21–03:04