Advent: Peace
Script References
Introduction  
The word peace is common in most languages. People can talk about peace 
treaties or times of peace; it means the absence of war. And in the Bible, 
the word peace can refer to the absence of conflict, but it also points to the 
presence of something better in its place.
In the Old Testament, the Hebrew word for peace is shalom, and in the New 
Testament the Greek word is eirene. The most basic meaning of shalom is 
complete or whole. The word can refer to a stone that has a perfect whole 
shape with no cracks. It can also refer to a completed stone wall that has no 
gaps and no missing bricks. Shalom refers to something that’s complex with 
lots of pieces that’s in a state of completeness, wholeness.
Shalom in the Hebrew Bible  
It’s like Job who says his tents are in a state of shalom because he counted his 
flock and no animals are missing.1 This is why shalom can refer to a person’s 
well-being. Like when David visited his brothers on the battlefield, he asked 
about their shalom.2 The core idea is that life is complex, full of moving parts 
and relationships and situations, and when any of these is out of alignment 
or missing, your shalom breaks down. Life is no longer whole. It needs to be 
restored.
In fact, that’s the basic meaning of shalom when you use it as a verb. To bring 
shalom literally means to make complete or restore. So Solomon brings 
shalom to the unfinished temple when he completes it.3 Or if your animal 
accidentally damages your neighbor’s field, you shalom them by giving them a 
complete repayment for their loss. You take what’s missing, and you restore it 
to wholeness. 
The same goes for human relationships. In the book of Proverbs, to reconcile 
and heal a broken relationship is to bring shalom. And when rival kingdoms 
make shalom in the Bible, it doesn’t just mean they stop fighting. It also means 
they start working together for each other’s benefit. 00:00–00:42
00:43–02:07
1. Job 5:24
2. 1 Samuel 17:22-23
3. 1 Kings 9:1;   
 2 Chronicles 7:11This state of shalom is what Israel’s kings were supposed to cultivate, and it 
rarely happened. So the prophet Isaiah, he looked forward to a future king, a 
prince of shalom. And his reign would bring shalom with no end—a time when 
God would make a covenant of shalom with his people and make right all 
wrongs and heal all that’s been broken.4
Jesus’ Birth Brings Eirene  
This is why Jesus’s birth in the New Testament was announced as the arrival 
of eirene.5 Remember that’s the Greek word for peace. Jesus came to offer his 
peace to others like when he said to his followers, “My peace I give to you all.”6
The apostles claimed that Jesus made peace between messed up humans 
and God when he died and rose from the dead. The idea is that he restored 
to wholeness the broken relationship between humans and their Creator. This 
is why the apostle Paul can say Jesus himself is our eirene. He was the whole, 
complete human that I am made to be but have failed to be, and now he gives 
me his life as a gift. And this means that Jesus’ followers are now called to 
create peace.
Paul instructed local churches to keep their unity through the bond of 
peace, which requires humility and patience and bearing with others in love.7 
Becoming people of peace means participating in the life of Jesus, who 
reconciled all things in heaven on earth, restoring peace through his death and 
resurrection.
So peace takes a lot of work because it’s not just the absence of conflict. True 
peace requires taking what’s broken and restoring it to wholeness, whether 
it’s in our lives, our relationships, or in our world. And that’s the rich biblical 
concept of peace.4. Isaiah 9
02:08–03:26
5. Luke 2:14
6. John 14:27
7. Ephesians 4:3