The Satan and Demons
Script References
A Spiritual Rebel in the Garden 
Jon: So we’ve been learning about spiritual beings in the Bible, and I still have a 
lot of questions about the bad ones.
Tim: Well, great! Let’s talk about the Satan and demons in the story of the Bible. 
 So let’s start in the beginning. In Genesis 1, God creates a beautiful, 
ordered reality out of darkness and disorder so that life can flourish. He 
appoints humans as his representatives to rule over all of it. And seven 
times God calls it “good.” 
Jon: Yeah. I experience that goodness often in the world, in things like beauty 
and truth, love and generosity. 
Tim: But in Genesis 3, we meet a creature who’s in a state of rebellion against 
his creator. We’re not yet told why or how he rebels, but he’s on a mission 
to ruin God’s good world for other creatures. 
Jon: This thing is trouble.
Tim: Yeah. This creature is the Bible’s first portrait of evil. It distorts what God 
has purposed for good, ruining and dragging creation back into darkness 
and disorder. 
Jon: So the humans join this spiritual rebel, which leads them back into chaos 
and death.
Tim: And from this point on, the human rebellion is interwoven with a spiritual 
rebellion. And the biblical story shows how this happens over and over 
again. 00:00–01:12Who Is the Snake? 
Jon: Okay, but wait. We’re getting all this from a slithering snake?
Tim: Well, there are clues in the story that it’s more than just a snake. 
Remember, Eden is a high place where the Earth and its creatures overlap 
with Heaven and its creatures. 
Jon: So the snake could be a spiritual being?
Tim: Well, Genesis 3 points in that direction, and then later biblical authors fill 
in the picture. Like when the prophet Isaiah has a vision of God’s heavenly 
throne room, he’s surrounded and being praised by the spiritual beings.1  
Jon: Yeah. These are the cherubim around God’s throne. 
Tim: But when Isaiah sees these creatures, he describes them as seraphim, 
which in Hebrew means “snake.” 
Jon: So the snake is like a former staff member in God’s throne room. So why is 
he talking to the humans?
Tim: Well, the prophet Ezekiel understood this figure as a spiritual rebel who 
didn’t want to live under God’s wisdom and authority. He wanted  
to be God.2  
Jon: Ah, right! That’s the same temptation the snake puts before Adam  
and Eve.3  
Tim: Exactly. He says they could rule the world like God but by their own 
wisdom. 
Jon: So they’re all kicked out of the garden.
Tim: Yeah. God says this rebel will now crawl on its belly.4  
Jon: Where does it go after this?
The Satan  
Tim: Well, the biblical authors offer subtle clues where this being is at work 
behind the scenes, animating division and hatred between humans. They 
also use a variety of images to describe this being. It’s a snake, or a sea 
dragon, or a dark desert creature, or the king of death and the grave. He’s 
also given many titles like, tempter, or the evil one, or the devil, which in 
Greek means “the slanderer.” 
Jon: But his name is Satan, right?
Tim: Actually, no. “Satan” is not a name; it’s another one of these titles, which 
is why in Hebrew, it has the word “the” in front of it. “The satan” means 
“the adversary” because he isn't for anything; rather, he’s anti-everything, 
working through lies to drag us back into darkness and disorder.01:13–02:20
1. Isaiah 6:1-3
2. Ezekiel 28:6-9
3. Genesis 3:1
4. Genesis 3:14
02:21–03:11Demons 
Jon: That’s intense. Now what about the other spiritual rebels in the Bible called 
demons. What are they all about?
Tim: Okay. So remember the concept of God’s heavenly staff team, the divine 
council, or the sons of God? In the Hebrew Scriptures, we’re told that 
some of these rebelled too. 
Jon: When did that happen?
Tim: Multiple times actually. After the snake comes the rebellion of the sons of 
God in Genesis 6. We’re told that they have sex with women who then give 
birth to violent warrior giants. 
Jon: Oh right, the Nephilim. These are probably the strangest characters in the 
whole Bible.
Tim: Well, strange from your point of view. But ancient readers knew exactly 
what was going on. The ancient kingdoms around Israel claimed to be 
founded and protected by giant warrior kings who were part human, part 
god and filled with divine wisdom. 
Jon: Ah, I see. So the biblical authors are saying, “Hey, those warrior kings? 
They shouldn’t be honored.”
Tim: Right. In this story, they’re portrayed as human rebels who are captive to 
spiritual evil, spreading their violence in God’s good world. 
Jon: Yeah. One of those kings in Genesis 10 goes on to build the city of 
Babylon. 
Tim: Yes, Nimrod, whose name sounds like the Hebrew word for “rebel.” And 
his kingdom leads to the next rebellion, where humans exalt themselves in 
Babylon.5  
Jon: But God scatters that rebellion.
Tim: And when Moses, in Deuteronomy, looks back at that story, he says that’s 
the moment when God handed over the nations to worship the rebel host 
of heaven—the gods of money, sex, and military power. Moses is the first 
one to call them demons, that is, lesser spiritual beings.6  
Jon: So demons are spiritual forces at work behind corrupt human power 
structures.
Jesus Overcomes Evil And Death Itself 
Tim: Yes, but in the Bible, they also work on the personal level, animating and 
exploiting humanity’s greed and selfishness, as well as the weakness of 
our mortal bodies. In the Bible, spiritual evil is at work in anything that 
drags God’s good creation back into chaos, darkness, and death. 03:12–04:53
5. Genesis 10:6-10; 11:1-4
6. Deuteronomy 32:16-17
04:54–05:42Jon: So this is why when Jesus arrives on the scene, he said his primary enemy 
is not human.
Tim: Right. Jesus and his first followers viewed all the pain and suffering in 
God’s good world as a sign of its captivity to death and spiritual evil.7  
Jon: But they didn’t think this was the end of the story.
Tim: Right. Jesus knew that the only way out of this cosmic ruin is to overcome 
evil and death itself, even if it cost him everything.8  
Credits 
Jon: You just watched a video in our Spiritual Beings series. This one was on the 
Satan and demons.
Tim: Next up is our last episode about how Jesus opens the way for a new 
humanity to rule with God over Heaven and Earth. 7. Ephesians 6:12
8. 1 Corinthians 2:6-8, 
Colossians 2:15
05:59–06:12