The Law 
Script References
Intro to the Law  
Jon: You are most likely familiar with the 10 commandments in the Bible—stuff 
we generally take as good advice: don’t murder, don’t steal, honor your 
parents. The list goes on.
Tim: And those are just the first 10. There are actually a total of 613 commands, 
all given to ancient Israel, found in the first five books of the Bible, which in 
Hebrew are called the “Torah.” 
Jon: Now the word torah is usually translated in English as “the law” because it 
has all these laws in it. And as you read through them you wonder, “Am I 
supposed to obey some of these? All of these? I mean, what’s the purpose 
of the law?”
Tim: Well that translation is kind of confusing because while the Torah has laws 
in it, the book itself is fundamentally a story about how God is creating 
new kinds of people who are fully able to love God and love others. And 
when Jesus taught about the Torah, he said that he was bringing that story 
to its fulfillment. 
Jon: So walk me through the story and how it’s fulfilled. 
The Story of the Torah  
Tim: So the story begins with God creating humanity, who rebels. And God 
chooses Abraham to bless all of the nations through his family, who end 
up in slavery down in Egypt. And so God rescues them. Then at Mount 
Sinai, God makes a covenant with Israel, like an agreement. And all of the 
laws that Moses gives to Israel are the terms of that agreement. They’re 
like a constitution. And so some of the laws, they’re about rituals and 
customs that set Israel apart from the nations, other laws are about social 
justice or morality. And by following these, Israel would show the other 
nations what God is like .1 00:00–00:53
00:54–02:43
1. Exodus 24:4–7
Deuteronomy 31:9Jon: Okay, so the rest of the Torah is just the complete list of laws that Moses 
gives Israel?
Tim: No. The rest of the Torah just continues the story, and the 613 commands 
are only a selection from that original constitution. And even these have 
been broken up and placed at strategic points within the story. Now pay 
attention, because you’ll see a really clear pattern. Moses gives the first 
laws to Israel.
Jon: Don’t worship other gods. Don’t make idols.
Tim: And then right after there’s a story of Israel breaking those very laws.
Jon: Yeah. They worship the golden calf.
Tim: And so Moses gives some more laws. And then you get more stories 
of rebellion, some more laws, rebellion again, some more laws, more 
rebellion, and you start to see the point.
Jon: Right. No matter how many laws, they are just going to continue to rebel.
Tim: So at the conclusion of the Torah’s story, Moses gives this final speech 
to Israel as they prepare to go into their new home. And he tells them, 
“You guys, I know that you’re not going to follow all of God’s laws. You’ve 
proven to me that you’re incapable.” And Moses says the problem is that 
their hearts are hard and that they’re going to need new transformed 
hearts if they’re ever going to truly follow God’s law .2 And he was right. I 
mean, the story goes on to recount Israel’s total failure. 
Jon: They go into the land. They break all the laws .3 
The Prophets  
Tim: Right. Now the next section of books in the Jewish tradition are the 15 
books of the prophets, and they reflect back on the story. For example, 
Ezekiel, he said that if Israel was ever going to obey the law, God’s Spirit 
would have to transform their hard hearts into soft hearts. And Jeremiah 
said that’s when obedience to God’s commands wouldn’t feel like a duty, 
that they’d be written deep in their hearts. And Isaiah, he promised a 
future leader, Israel’s Messiah, who will lead all of the people in obedience 
to the law .4 
Now, in Jewish tradition all of these books together are called the Prophets, 
even the historical books, because they are continuing the story, told from 
the perspective of the prophets.
Jon: Okay, so we have the law and the prophets, and they’re telling one 
connected story about God’s desire to bless the whole world through a 
people, Israel, who, it turns out, needs a new heart.2. Deuteronomy 30
3. Judges–2 Kings
02:44–03:34
4. Ezekiel 36
Jeremiah 31Jesus Fulfills the Law  
Tim: Yes! And Jesus saw himself as continuing that story. So he agreed with 
the law and the prophets when he taught that it’s out of the human heart 
that come the most ugly parts of human nature. It’s like the default setting 
of our hearts is opposed to God’s law. But Jesus also said that he came to 
solve that problem and, in his words, “to fulfill the law.” 5 
Jon: So what does he mean there, to “fulfill the law”? 
Tim: Well, first he said that the demand of all the laws in the Torah could be 
fulfilled by what he called “the great command,” that we are to love God 
and to love others. 6 
Jon: So that seems pretty easy. I mean, we all want to love.
Tim: Well, we think we want to love. But Jesus showed how love is far more 
demanding than we realize. So he quotes the law, “Do not murder,” and 
he says, “Yes. Not killing someone is a very loving thing to do.” But then he 
also says that when you treat someone with disrespect or when you nurse 
resentment against them, you’re also violating God’s moral ideal because 
you are not treating that person with love. And so Jesus said true love 
ought to extend even to our own enemies. So even though this command 
seems very simple, Jesus showed how our hearts are not currently 
equipped to fulfill even this basic command of God to love others. 
Transformed Hearts  
Jon: That’s kind of a downer.
Tim: But where Israel failed, Jesus brought the story to its fulfillment. As Israel’s 
Messiah, he fully loved God and others, and he showed all of the nations 
what God is truly like. He did this through his acts of compassion and 
mercy and ultimately by loving his enemies even unto death. And after 
his resurrection, he told his followers that he would send God’s Spirit to 
transform their hearts so that they could follow him and fulfill the purpose 
of the law—to love God and to love their neighbor. So this fulfills the story 
of the law and the prophets, or in the words of the apostle Paul, “The one 
who loves fulfills the law. ” 7 03:35–04:45
5. Matthew 5:17
6. Matthew 22:34–40
04:46–05:26
7:13–14; 8:1–12
Galatians 3:13–147. Romans 3:19–20; 5:20; 