Jewish Meditation Literature
Script References
Historical & Cultural Contexts of Literature 
Jon: So the Bible is a collection of books written in different literary styles like 
narrative, poetry, and prose. And most of us are familiar with these kinds 
of literature. 
Tim: Yeah. We all know a narrative when we see one, like The Hunger Games or 
The Great Gatsby. 
Jon: And most people can recognize poetry whether it’s Walt Whitman or the 
songs of Bob Dylan. 
Tim: And every day we’re surrounded by prose in news articles or essays. 
Jon: Now all these examples are modern American literature in that they came 
from this time period and this region of the world. 
Tim: But there’s also medieval English literature from another place and time or 
ancient Greek writings from this place and time. 
Jon: So each time period and culture produces its own unique kind of 
literature.
Tim: And in order to read the Bible well, we need to keep in mind that it comes 
from this part of the world and was produced in this basic period of time.
Details in Jewish Literature 
Jon: So what’s unique about ancient Jewish literature? 
Tim: Well, a key feature is that it lacks a lot of the details that modern readers 
have come to expect in stories and poems. 
Jon: And this makes it seem really simple. 
Tim: But actually it’s very sophisticated literature. Every detail that is given 
matters.00:00–00:46
00:46–01:25Jon: And that’s great, but the lack of detail means the stories are often loaded 
with ambiguities. I mean, take one of the first stories, Adam and Eve in the 
garden. Where did this talking snake come from, and why did God allow 
him there? Why didn’t Adam and Eve die on the spot like God said they 
would? And who’s this offspring of the woman who will destroy the snake 
but is bitten by it?
Authorial Intent 
Tim: Yeah—so many puzzles in this story. And some of these are questions that 
we have and that are not important to what the author is focusing on. But 
some of these ambiguities are intentional. 
Jon: Intentional? Won’t that lead to bad interpretations, people filling in the 
gaps with their own answers? 
Tim: Well that’s a risk the biblical authors took in writing this way. We all tend to 
impose our own cultural assumptions onto the Bible, but they apparently 
thought the risk was worth it. These oddities are really invitations into an 
adventure of reading and discovery. 
Jon: What do you mean? 
Tim: Well, for example, the strange promise about the offspring of the woman 
crushing and being bitten by the snake. That word “offspring” is a clue to 
pay attention to genealogies, which, lo and behold, run all through the 
whole biblical narrative. They trace the lineage of Eve all the way to King 
David and his offspring. And in the New Testament, Jesus is connected to 
the offspring of this royal line. 
Now, when you read the prophets, Isaiah connected this king to the 
suffering servant who would die on behalf of his people. And then in the 
book of Revelation, there’s this symbolic vision, and can you guess? It’s 
about a woman and her offspring. It’s Jesus and his followers who conquer 
the dragon by giving up their lives. 
Jon: Yeah, so each part of the story there is loaded with ambiguities, but all 
together it makes sense. 
Tim: And this is the literary genius of the Bible. It forces you to keep reading 
and then interpret each part in light of the others.
The Bible as Meditative Literature 
Jon: This is feeling complicated. I don’t know if I can do all that. 
Tim: Well you’re actually not expected to notice all of this by yourself or all at 
once. This dense way of writing forces you to slow down and then read 
carefully, embarking on this interactive discovery process through the 
whole biblical narrative over a lifetime of reading and re-reading. 01:26–02:52
02:53–04:04Jon: Ah, okay. Meditation literature.
Tim: Yeah. In Psalm 1, we read about the ideal Bible reader. It’s someone who 
meditates on the Scriptures day and night. In Hebrew, the word “meditate” 
means literally to mutter or speak quietly. The idea is that every day for 
the rest of your life you slowly, quietly read the Bible out loud to yourself 
and then go talk about it with your friends, pondering the puzzles, making 
connections, and discovering what it all means. And as you let the Bible 
interpret itself, something remarkable happens. The Bible starts to read 
you. Because ultimately the writers of the Bible want you to adopt this 
story as your story.
Jon: So this ancient Jewish writing style, it must create unique types of 
narrative, and poetry, and discourse. 
Tim: Yes, and we’ll explore all those literary styles starting next with biblical 
narrative. 