Luke-Acts Series
The Prodigal Son: Luke 9-19 
Script References
Introduction
Jon: The Gospel of Luke opened with the birth of Jesus. 1
Tim: Then Luke showed us how Jesus was Israel’s Messiah announcing the 
good news of God’s Kingdom to the poor and how he was God’s true 
prophet to Israel. 2 
Jon: In this next section, Jesus sets out with his disciples on a long road trip 
to Jerusalem, where they’ll join thousands of Israelites to celebrate the 
ancient feast of Passover. 
Tim: Now, Luke wants this road trip from the mountain to Jerusalem to 
remind you of ancient Israel’s long road trip. With Moses, they went from 
Mount Sinai to the promised land, and then later, King David established 
Jerusalem as their capital. And so here Luke is portraying Jesus as a new 
Moses who’s renewing Israel’s covenant with God, and as a new David. 
He’s gathering the people together to live under his rule. 
Jon: As Jesus leaves, he sends out a wave of his followers ahead of him to 
prepare each new place for his visit .3
Tim: Then Jesus would arrive, announcing the good news of God’s Kingdom, 
and he would call people to follow him and join this new thing God was 
doing in Israel. 00:00-01:01
1. Luke 1-2
2. Luke 3-9
3. Luke 10Jesus’ Upside-Down Kingdom
Jon: There are many of his teachings and parables in this section, specifically 
about how following Jesus will force you to totally rethink your money, 
how you resolve conflict, and how you treat the poor. 
Tim: In every town, Jesus would create communities of people who were 
learning to live in a totally new way, so that greed would be transformed 
into generosity and anger into forgiveness. And in these Jesus 
communities, all outsiders are welcomed.
Jon: Yeah! Good news for the poor! That’s one of Luke’s main themes.
Tim: Yeah. You’ll find it all over this section. The marginalized people that he 
heals, the shamed sex workers he reaches out to, the tax collectors he 
includes, this is Jesus’ Kingdom crew. 
Jon: And Israel’s religious leaders watch and start to criticize him. If he really is 
God’s prophet, why is he welcoming sinners and eating with them?  4
Jesus and the Religious Leaders
Tim: Yeah. This section reads like the battle of the banquets. So Jesus throws 
these dinner parties as a symbol of how God’s Kingdom is here for the sick 
and the poor, people who could never pay him back.
Jon: Jesus also attends banquets with Israel’s religious leaders. 
Tim: Yeah, and he lays into them for becoming an arrogant, exclusive  
social club. 
Jon: But they don’t get it, and so he tells them a famous parable that goes  
like thi s: 5
Tim: There was a father who had two sons. 
Jon: The older son is trustworthy and honors his father. 
Tim: And the younger son? He’s a mess. He rebels and cashes in his inheritance 
to travel far away and blow it all on partying and being stupid. 
Jon: And then there’s a famine in the land and he runs out of money, so he has 
to scrape by by taking care of somebody’s pigs. And he’s so hungry he 
wants to eat the pig slop, at which point it occurs to him: “If I’m going to 
be a farmhand, I might as well go home and work for my dad. At least I 
won’t be eating pig food.” So he treks back home, rehearsing his apology.
Tim: Now, the father is certain that his son did not survive the famine. But then 
one day, he sees someone walking down the road. It’s his son! He’s not 
dead! And so the father runs to him and embraces his son, kissing him  
all over. 01:02-01:45
4. Luke 15:2
01:46-03:49
5. Luke 15:11-32Jon: The son starts his speech. “Dad, I don’t deserve to be your son. Maybe I 
could come and work for you.”
Tim: But before he can finish, the father calls his servants to get the nicest robe, 
new sandals, a fancy ring for his son. They’re to prepare the best food for a 
banquet. It is time to celebrate! 
Jon: Now later that day, the older brother arrives from a long day working in 
the field to discover his long lost loser of a brother has come home. And 
they’re celebrating?! 
Tim: And he gets angry. And think about it. He’s been faithful to his father all 
of these years. He never got a party like this. And then this disgrace of 
a family member comes home, and they’re going to celebrate him? It’s 
disgusting! He refuses to join the banquet.
Jon: So the father finds the older brother outside and he says:  
Tim: Son, you are already in our family. Everything I have is yours. But we had 
to celebrate your brother because he was lost and now he’s found! He was 
dead but now he is alive. 
Entry Requirement to the Kingdom
Jon: Jesus wants the religious leaders to see the outsiders the way God sees 
them, as sons and daughters that are being reclaimed from death.
Tim: Jesus’ Kingdom community was wide open to anybody. The only entry 
requirement is to humble yourself and recognize your need for God’s 
mercy. And so the religious leaders’ rejection of Jesus and his crew is 
actually a rejection of the God of Israel. 
Jon: The leaders don’t like all this, and so as Jesus’ road trip comes to an end, 
the conflict is at a boiling point.
Tim: Yeah. He’s going to ride towards Jerusalem for Passover as they plot to 
take his life. And that’s what the next section of Luke is all about.03:50-04:27