The Crucifixion of Jesus: Luke 19-23
Script References
Jesus in Jerusalem  
Jon: So we’re walking through the Gospel of Luke, and we’ve reached the end 
of Jesus’ long road trip to Jerusalem. He’s arrived.
Tim: So he rides a donkey down the Mount of Olives towards the city. And all 
these crowds are forming, and people are singing, “Praise the king who 
comes in the name of the Lord.” They’re laying down their cloaks in front 
of him. 1 
Jon: Yeah. Why all this royal treatment?
Tim: Okay. So Israel’s ancient prophets promised that one day God himself 
would arrive and rescue his people and rule the world. Other times the 
prophets spoke about a coming king who would ride into Jerusalem to 
bring justice and peace. 2 
Jon: So Jesus is activating all these hopes, that he’s that king. And everyone is 
ecstatic. 
Tim: Well, not everybody. The religious leaders, they think Jesus is a threat 
to their power, and so they’re not happy. But even more striking, Jesus 
himself is distraught. He’s actually weeping as he rides. 3
Jon: Yeah. Why?
Tim: Well, Jesus can see what is coming. He knows that he won’t be accepted 
as Israel’s King. And he knows that Israel will keep going down a 
destructive path, neglecting the poor, stirring up rebellion against their 
Roman oppressors. And he knows that it will lead to death. It breaks his 
heart.
The Corruption of Israel  
Jon: And it riles him up! The first thing he does in Jerusalem is march into the 
temple courts, and he drives out the money changers, disrupting the 
entire sacrificial system. 400:00–01:10
1. Luke 19:29-40
2. Zechariah 9:9
3. Luke 19:41-44
01:11–03:20
4. Luke 19:45-48Tim: Yeah. He’s staging a prophetic protest, and he stands in the center of 
the courtyard shouting out words from Israel’s ancient prophets. “This is 
supposed to be a place of worship, but you’ve made it a den of rebels!” 5 
Jon: A den of rebels? 
Tim: Yes. He’s quoting from the prophet Jeremiah, who stood in this same spot, 
the center of Israel’s religious and political power. And he offered the same 
critique of Israel’s leaders: that they’re rebellious and corrupt. 6
Jon: And they get the message and start to plan to have him killed.
Tim: Which is no surprise to Jesus. In fact, he planned that all of this would 
happen during Passover. 
Jon: This is the holy week when Jewish people celebrate their ancient story of 
how God liberated them from slavery and invited them into a covenant 
relationship. 7
Tim: And so Jesus uses the symbols of Passover to reveal the meaning of his 
coming death. The broken bread was his broken body, and the wine was 
his blood that would establish a new covenant relationship between God 
and Israel. Jesus was going to die for his people and open up a new way 
forward. 8
Jon: After the meal, Jesus takes his disciples to a garden to pray. 9
Tim: And he struggles with the very human desire to save his life instead of 
sacrificing it, but he overcomes this temptation. 10
Jon: And it’s here where the religious leaders with the temple guards find him 
and arrest him.
Tim: Now, Jerusalem was being ruled by the Roman empire. And so the temple 
leaders couldn’t execute Jesus without permission from their Roman 
governor, a man named Pontius Pilate. And so they make up this charge 
that Jesus is a rebel king stirring up revolution against the Roman emperor.  
Jon: Pilate asks Jesus, “Are you the king of the Jews?” 11
Tim: And Jesus answers, “You say so.” 
Jon: Pilate can see that Jesus is an innocent man and he doesn’t deserve death. 
Tim: But the leaders keep insisting that he is dangerous, so they negotiate 
a compromise. Pilate will release an actual rebel against Rome, a man 
named Barabbas, instead of Jesus. And so the innocent is handed over in 
the place of the guilty. 125. Luke 19:46
6. Jeremiah 7:11
7. Exodus 12
8. Luke 22:7-23
9. Luke 22:39-46
10. Luke 22:42
11. Luke 23:3
12. Luke 23:18-25The Death of Jesus  
Jon: Jesus is taken away with two other accused criminals and nailed to a 
Roman execution device. And people are mocking him: “Hey! If you’re the 
messianic king, save yourself and us!” 13
Tim: But Jesus loved his enemies to the very end, offering hope to one of the 
criminals dying beside him. And he even prayed for his executors: “Father, 
forgive them. They don’t know what they’re doing.” 14
Jon: And then the sky darkened as an innocent man died the death of a rebel. 15
Tim: And then Jesus cried out with ancient words from Israel’s Psalms, “Father, 
into your hands I commit my spirit.” 16 And then Jesus died, innocent and 
alone. 1703:21–04:05
13. Luke 23:39
14. Luke 23:34
15. Luke 23:44
16. Psalm 31:5
17. Luke 23:46