Prophets 
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: Ezekiel, Obadiah, Habakkuk. What do these names have in common? Well, 
they’re three of the fifteen prophets that have their own books in the Bible.
Tim: And if you’ve tried to read these books, odds are you got lost in their 
dense poetry and strange imagery. But these books are super important 
for understanding the overall biblical story. 
Jon: So let’s talk about how to read the prophets. 
The Role of Biblical Prophets 
Jon: When I hear the word “prophet,” I think of a fortune teller—someone who 
predicts the future. 
Tim: That's what being a prophet means in many cultures but not in the Bible. 
While the biblical prophets sometimes speak about the future, they’re way 
more than fortune tellers. 
Jon: How should I think about them?
Tim: Well, they were Israelites who had a radical encounter with God’s presence 
and then were commissioned to go and speak on God’s behalf.
Jon: Like a representative.
Tim: Right. And the thing that they cared about the most is the mutual 
partnership that existed between God and the Israelites. 
Jon: Right, the partnership. God rescued Israel from slavery in Egypt and 
invited them to become a nation of justice and generosity that would 
represent his character to the nations.
Tim: And so this partnership required all Israelites to give their trust and 
allegiance to their God alone. In the Bible, this partnership is called the 
“covenant.”100:00–00:20
00:21–01:47
1. Genesis 12;    
 Exodus 19;    
 Leviticus 26;  
 Deuteronomy 28-30;   
 Numbers 25;  
 2 Samuel 7;    
 Psalm 2, 72, 89, 132;   
 Deuteronomy 30;   
 Jeremiah 31;    
 Ezekiel 36Jon: But their leaders, the priests, the kings, led Israel astray and they broke the 
covenant. 
Tim: And so this is where the prophets came in, to remind Israel of their role in 
the partnership. And they did this in three ways. First, they were constantly 
accusing Israel for violating the terms of the covenant. The charges 
usually include idolatry, alliances with other nations and their gods, and 
allowing injustice towards the poor. 
Jon: Ah, so like covenant lawyers.
Tim: Right. And so second, the prophets called the Israelites to repent, which 
means simply to turn around. They spoke of God’s mercy to forgive them if 
they would just confess and change their ways. 
Jon: But Israel and its leaders didn’t change. Things went from bad to worse. 
The Day of the Lord 
Tim: And so that brings us to the third way the prophets emphasized the 
covenant. They announced the consequences for breaking it, which they 
called the Day of the Lord.
Jon: Oh yeah, the apocalypse! Visions of the end of the world!
Tim: Well, sort of. The prophets were mostly interested in how God would bring 
his justice on Israel’s corruption and on the violent nations around them. 
And while explaining these local events, they often use cosmic imagery.
Jon: Cosmic imagery?
Tim: Yeah, like Jeremiah. He described the exile of the Israelites to Babylon as 
the undoing of creation itself. The land dissolves into chaos and disorder, 
no light, no animals or people. Or Isaiah described the downfall of Babylon 
as the disintegration of the cosmos—stars falling from the sky, the sun 
going dark. For the prophets, when God acts in human history to bring 
justice, it’s a Day of the Lord.2
Jon: So the prophets aren’t talking about the end of the world? 
Tim: Well, hold on. They’re doing many things at once. The cosmic imagery 
shows how these important events of their day fit into the bigger story of 
God’s mission to bring down every corrupt and violent nation once and for 
all. The prophets cared about the present and the future, and the cosmic 
imagery allowed them to talk about both at the same time. 
Jon: Got it. So no matter when you live, the Day of the Lord is bad news if 
you’re part of Babylon.
Tim: But it’s good news if you’re waiting for God’s Kingdom. The Day of the 
Lord pointed to the return of the exiles to Jerusalem. And once again, the 
prophets use cosmic poetry to describe it. They see a new Jerusalem like a 01:48–03:25
2. Jeremiah 33:10;   
 Isaiah 34:4new garden of Eden, with all humanity living at peace with each other and 
with the animals. And there’s a new messianic King who restores God’s 
Kingdom in a renewed creation.3
A Story of Hope and Restoration  
Jon: Beautiful. So those are the three themes in the prophets. These prophets 
must have been very powerful, persuasive speakers.
Tim: Well, some were, but others lived on the margins. They would often 
perform strange symbolic stunts in public to communicate their message. 
Like when Ezekiel lay in the dirt and built a model of Jerusalem being 
attacked by Babylon, or when Isaiah walked around naked for three years 
as a symbol of the humiliation of exile.4
Jon: So did people pay attention to them?
Tim: Not really. The stories in these books show how the prophets were a 
minority group mostly shunned by Israel’s leaders. And their writings were 
a kind of resistance literature. Most people ignored them, that is, until their 
warnings came true in the Babylonian exile. 
Jon: And after that, people began to take their words seriously.
Tim: Yes. The works of these earlier prophets were inherited by later unnamed 
prophets who studied these texts intensely. They’re the ones who 
arranged the Hebrew Scriptures as we know them, including the books of 
the prophets.
Conclusion  
Jon: Okay. And there’s fifteen books of the prophets. The big three are Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, and Ezekiel.
Tim: And then there’s a collection of twelve smaller prophetic works unified on 
a single scroll. And in each of these books, you will read stories about the 
prophets and their poems and visions all arranged to show the cosmic 
meaning of Israel’s history—how God would turn their tragic story of 
failure and exile ...
Jon: Into a story of hope and restoration for all nations.
Tim: And it’s that twin message of prophetic warning and of hope that the 
prophets cared about so much. And it’s a message we still need to hear 
today. 3. Revelation 21
03:26–04:22
4. Ezekiel 4:1-17;   
 Isaiah 20:2-4
04:23–5:00