The Book of Psalms 
Script References
Introduction  
Jon: We’ve been talking about poetry in the Bible—how biblical poets love 
design and masterfully use metaphor and symbolism. These poems invite 
us into an experience, to ponder ideas slowly and from many angles.
Tim: And the largest collection of poetry in the Bible is the book of Psalms, so 
that’s what we’re going to look at here.
A Literary Temple 
Jon: Now the Israelites composed lots of poetry throughout their history. 
Tim: Yeah. Poems were written by Israelite sages, kings, and prophets. Some 
poems were sung by choirs in the Jerusalem temple, while others were 
prayed by families at home. And over the centuries, the most important 
and widely read poems were compiled together to be read or sung on 
special occasions. 
Jon: And I’m familiar with books of poetry, a large collection of the greatest 
poems in one place, and I can read through and pick my favorites. 
Tim: But the book of Psalms isn’t that kind of collection. Here, each poem has 
been expertly crafted and then placed where it is for a reason to create a 
storyline from the book’s beginning to its end. The Psalms poetically retell 
the entire biblical story, and they invite you into a literary temple. 
Jon: A literary temple? 
Tim: Yeah. So the tabernacle and then later the temple in Jerusalem were 
where ancient Israelites went to meet with God. When you arrived, you 
would see art and imagery everywhere. You’d see priests performing 
rituals, you’d hear songs and prayers, all of it symbolically proclaiming that 
your God rules the world from this mountain. And you’re in his living room. 
Jon: So the temple was a place to be in God’s presence and also to immerse 
yourself in the story. 00:00–00:19
00:20–01:58Tim: Exactly. And so try to imagine how traumatic it was when the Babylonians 
invaded Jerusalem, plundered and burned the temple, and then took 
many Israelites into exile.
Jon: Yeah. Where can they go now to meet with God, to sing their story and say 
their prayers? 
Tim: That’s where the book of Psalms comes in. It’s a prayer book for exiles 
designed as a virtual temple. You enter the Psalms to meet with God and 
to hear the entire biblical story of God’s Kingdom sung back to you in 
poetry.
The Design of Psalms 
Jon: Cool, but how does the Psalms do it?
Tim: Let’s start with the book’s design. There are 150 poems broken up into five 
clear sections.  At the beginning, there’s been placed a short introduction, 
Psalms 1 and 2, which lay out the main themes of the entire book by 
reviewing the biblical storyline.
Jon: Okay.
 Tim: Psalm 1 looks back to the garden of Eden and its river of life. 
Jon: Yeah. God placed humanity in a garden-temple. And here, humans decide 
to define good and evil on their own terms and so are exiled from the 
garden. 
Tim: But the first psalm paints a portrait of hope about an upright human who 
delights in God’s wisdom, which is called Torah, or “instruction.” This 
person is like the tree of life in the garden-temple. They eternally blossom 
because they’re planted in the river of God’s life.
Jon: Yeah. That’s beautiful. But who’s it supposed to be?
Tim: Well, remember that story in Genesis. After humanity’s foolish rebellion, 
God made a promise.
Jon: Oh right. A future human, the seed of the woman, who would come and 
defeat evil and restore the world.  
Tim: And that’s what Psalm 2 is about, God’s promise that a king would come 
from the line of David. He’s called the “son of God” and “the Messiah.” God 
appoints him to bring justice on human evil and to restore God’s Kingdom 
and peace over the nations. 
Jon: So Psalms 1 and 2 introduce all these main themes.  
Tim: Yeah, and then the book develops those themes through the five sections. 
The first two explore the complicated story of David and his royal family. 
The third section focuses on the tragedy of Israel’s exile and the downfall 01:59–03:41of David’s royal line. But the fourth and fifth sections rekindle the hope for 
the Messiah, a new temple, and God’s Kingdom on the other side of the 
exile. Then the book ends with a five-part conclusion, praising God for his 
faithfulness. 
David and the Psalms  
Jon: Cool. Now, nearly half of the psalms are connected to one guy, King David, 
who God chose to rule Israel. 
Tim: Yes. David’s story is really important in this book. He experienced many 
times of hardship, but he trusted God with radical faith. And in these 
poems, David shares his fears, confesses his failures, and offers thanks 
to his redeemer. And he’s constantly speaking of a deep longing to be in 
God’s presence in the temple.
Jon: But wait! David lived before the temple was even built.
Tim: Exactly. This portrait of David hoping and praying for God’s Kingdom and a 
future temple, it resembles the hopes of the later generations of the exiles. 
And so David’s prayers could become theirs as well. 
Jon: David’s like a prayer coach, giving us words for how to pray and how to 
discover God’s presence in good times and bad.
Tim: Exactly. There are 73 poems connected to David, but most of the rest 
come from later generations of biblical poets. And they have learned to 
pray and hope like David. And so the end result is the book of Psalms, 
designed as a virtual temple for all generations of God’s people.1
Conclusion  
Jon: This isn’t the kind of book you just read once and put down. 
Tim: No. It’s designed for a lifetime of slow re-reading and reflection. These 
prayers and laments and songs of praise are meant to become our own. 
They’re poems for exiles, who are learning to live by God’s wisdom and to 
seek God’s justice in the world as they hope for the coming Messiah and 
the Kingdom of God. 03:42–04:46
1. Psalms 2-32, 34-41,  
 51-65, 68-70, 86,  
 95, 101, 103, 105- 
 106, 108-110, 122,  
 124, 131, 138-145
04:47–05:11