The Last Will Be First
Script References
00:00-00:35 Introduction
Jon:  Throughout human history, many societies have been led by some kind 
of king or ruler. And when that king dies, he passes down his power and 
inheritance to his firstborn son.
Tim:  This is often called the “right of the firstborn” or “the birthright.”
Jon:  And this practice wasn’t just for kings but also for families. 
Tim:  Yeah. Fathers would pass on their authority to the firstborn as the rightful 
heir of the family estate. 
Jon:  But what if the firstborn son isn’t the most qualified? What if they’re bad for 
the job?
Tim:  Yeah. History has shown that firstborns often abuse their birthright, using 
it for personal gain, leading to conflict and violence. 
God Subverts the Cultural Norm
Jon:  Now, the Bible came into existence in a culture where the right of the 
firstborn was normal and taken for granted. 
Tim:  But interestingly, in the story of the Bible, God consistently overturns this 
cultural norm.
Jon:  Really?
Tim:  Yeah. From the beginning, God regularly selects the younger sibling, the 
latecomer, and gives them the birthright. For example, in the story of the 
first two brothers, God elevates the second-born, Abel, over Cain, his 
firstborn brother.1
Jon:  Oh right. And later, God says that the blessing and the inheritance will go 
to Isaac, Abraham’s second born, instead of Ishmael, his first.21. Genesis 4:1-1600:36-01:53
2. Genesis 17:20-21Tim:  And then when Isaac has two sons, God promises that the younger  
one, Jacob, will have authority over his older brother, Esau, and inherit 
God’s blessing.3
Jon:  I’m seeing a clear pattern.
Tim:  And it continues! Later, when Israel wants a king of their own, they choose 
this tall, powerful ruler named Saul, who then has a firstborn son named 
Jonathan. But God chooses the next king from a low-status family, a boy 
named David who is the youngest among eight brothers.4
Jon:  So for the God of the Bible, the birthright doesn’t necessarily belong to 
those who are first or most important. 
Tim:  Right. God consistently challenges human-made systems of power and 
value that tend towards abuse. And he turns them upside-down.
Subversion Leads to More Violence
Jon:  But this doesn’t end all the conflict in the Bible. Often, the older sibling is 
furious about being passed up. 
Tim:  True. And just as often, the younger sibling who gets the birthright abuses 
their power too. In fact, almost all the wars and conflicts in the Bible are 
framed as sibling rivalries.
Jon:  You mean violence between actual brothers, like Cain killing Abel?
Tim:  Yes, but also the tribes and nations that descend from these earlier sibling 
rivals. If you track with all the genealogies in the biblical story, you see that 
everybody is related. It’s a huge family feud.
Jon:  So whether the older or the younger gets the authority, the human family 
is stuck in a never-ending sibling rivalry over who gets to be first.
God Subverts the Norm Again With Jesus
Tim:  And so here we have to turn to the story of Jesus. His earliest followers 
called him, “the firstborn of all creation.” 5
Jon:  “The firstborn of creation?” What does that mean?
Tim:  It’s a statement that describes his status. In the New Testament, Jesus is 
portrayed as God-become-human, the eternal Son of God who brought 
creation into being and has all authority.6
Jon:  So if anyone deserves the ultimate birthright, it’s Jesus. 
Tim:  Yes, and Jesus did claim that God’s royal power was arriving in a new way 
through himself. But it was power redefined.701:54-02:36
02:37-04:234. 1 Samuel 16:11-13
5. Romans 8:29
6. Hebrews 1:1-6
7. Matthew 26:63-663. Genesis 25:30-34Jon:  Yeah. Jesus said that if you want to be first, you need to become last.8
Tim:  And he said that people with real authority are those who serve.9  
In fact, this redefinition of power is explored in an early Christian  
poem about Jesus.
Jon:  “While he was in his very nature God, he didn’t exploit his equality with 
God for self-advantage; rather, he emptied himself of status and power, 
and became a servant.” 10
Tim:  Jesus joined the poor and served them. And instead of fighting his rivals, 
he served them too. Jesus showed that true power is displayed through 
self-giving love. 
Jon:  But Jesus did confront those in power.
Tim:  Yes. He challenged Israel’s leaders for using their power to benefit 
themselves at the expense of the many.
Jon:  And that’s what got him killed. Like angry firstborn sons, the leaders 
leveraged their power to have Jesus executed. 
Tim:  But you can’t really kill the firstborn over creation. He’s the author of life 
itself! And so Jesus rose from the dead, and he was elevated as ruler over 
Heaven and Earth.11 And this earned him a new title: the firstborn from 
among the dead.12
Jesus Establishes a New Way To Rule
Jon:  Then Jesus told his followers that all of his authority, his birthright and this 
blessing, he was sharing it with them as sisters and brothers.13
Tim:  So that they could create communities that are a new kind of family, 
ordered by a Jesus-style redefinition of power.
Jon:  These are families that set aside rivalries and invite everyone to share the 
responsibility of being sons and daughters in a new royal family.
Tim:  And when Jesus’ people discover that real power is love, that’s when they 
truly become the family of the firstborn.04:24-04:599. Matthew 20:26-28
10. Philippians 2:6-7
11. Matthew 28:18-20
12. Revelation 1:5
13. Romans 8:298. Matthew 20:16; 
Mark 9:35