Visual Commentary: Matthew 5-7
Script References
00:00-01:35 Whole Sermon Overview
Jon:  The Gospel of Matthew is one of the earliest accounts of Jesus of Nazareth. 
Tim:  And in chapters 5-7, we find a collection of Jesus’ most well-known 
teachings, often called the Sermon on the Mount. Here, we learn what 
Jesus means when he announces that "the Kingdom of the Skies has  
come near,” and what it looks like to participate in God’s Kingdom. 
The whole sermon has been given a three-part shape. There’s the 
introduction, then the large main body, and then the conclusion.  
The introduction1 announces the surprising, counter-intuitive identity 
of those who are part of God’s Kingdom. Then comes the main body of 
teaching,2 where Jesus explores what he means when he calls his followers 
to be “righteous.” 
Jon:  What does he mean by righteousness?
Tim:  Righteousness is about living in right relationship with God and with 
others. It’s a character trait that creates justice and peace in the world. 
And the body of the sermon is like Jesus’ manifesto on righteousness, 
examined from three angles in three big parts: how this righteousness 
relates to the Torah,3 how this righteousness relates to religious practices 
of his day,4 and how this righteousness is expressed in our relationships 
with God and with neighbor.5
Finally, Jesus concludes the sermon6 by calling people to make a choice 
about how they’re going to respond.
Jon:  Okay, I see it. Three main parts of this whole sermon, and then the middle 
part itself has three parts.  
Tim:  Right! And then, every one of these parts itself has three parts. There is a 
lot of design in the structure of the Sermon on the Mount, and we’re going 
to go over all of it.1. Matthew 5:3-16
2. Matthew 5:17-7:12
3. Matthew 5:18-48
4. Matthew 6:1-21
5. Matthew 6:19-7:12
6. Matthew 7:13-27 Matthew 5:3-16: The Three Identities
Tim:  In the introduction, Jesus offers a surprise announcement to the people 
standing in front of him. They are invited to experience the good life 
of God’s Kingdom. He first offers nine sayings that redefine who is 
experiencing the good life, commonly called The Beatitudes. Here, we 
learn that those entering God’s Kingdom first are the lowly outsiders who 
hunger for righteousness and suffer as peacemakers.
Jon:  Next, Jesus calls his followers “salt of the land.” 7 What’s this all about?
Tim:  In the Hebrew scriptures, salt is a symbol of God’s long-lasting covenant 
relationship with Israel. So Jesus is claiming that he and his followers are 
carrying Israel’s covenant relationship to its fulfillment. 
Jon:  Next, Jesus calls them “the light of the world” and “a city set up on a 
mountain.” 8 
Tim:  Jesus is referencing here a promise from the prophet Isaiah—that one 
day, the inhabitants of Jerusalem would reflect God’s light and peace and 
blessing out to all the world.9
Jon:  So Jesus is saying that he and his followers are fulfilling that promise.
Tim:  Right! And how they go about doing that is what the rest of the Sermon on 
the Mount is all about.
Matthew 5:17-48: Righteousness and the Torah
Jon:  Now, in the main body of the sermon, Jesus calls his followers to do 
righteousness.
Tim:  Righteousness means living in right relationship with God and with others. 
And Jesus explores his vision of righteousness from three perspectives, 
resulting in three big parts to the main body of the sermon.
Jon:  The first perspective is that his teachings about righteousness fulfill the 
Torah and Prophets. What does this mean?
Tim:  Well, the Torah and Prophets refer to the Hebrew scriptures. And this big 
idea that Jesus fulfills them, it’s unpacked in three parts. First, Jesus claims 
that he’s not setting aside the laws of the Torah. Rather, he’s bringing 
Israel’s story and all of its laws to their completion.10 Next, Jesus offers six 
case studies of how his righteousness fulfills the Torah. He explores the 
topics of anger, lust, divorce, telling the truth, revenge, and enemy love.11 
Finally, Jesus sums up this way of life as “teleios,” a Greek word that means 
“complete” or “whole.” 12 The purpose of the Torah is to teach people 
God’s wisdom, so they can become mature, whole people who spread 
God’s blessing to the world. And this call to become whole or complete 
links back to this section’s beginning, where Jesus claims that living by his 
teachings will “fulfill” the Torah and the Prophets.13 02:43-04:018. Matthew 5:14-16
9. Isaiah 60:2-4
10. Matthew 5:17-21
11. Matthew 5:22-47
12. Matthew 5:48
13. Matthew 5:17-2001:36-02:42
7. Matthew 5:13Matthew 6:1-21: Righteousness and Religious Practices
Jon:  Next, Jesus looks at how his righteousness relates to the religious 
practices of his day. Now this section has three parts.
Tim:  Right! In the first part, Jesus claims that living in right relationship with 
God and others results in a reward. But be careful, Jesus says, because if 
you’re doing your righteousness to get public praise, then you’ll miss out 
on the real reward that God has in store.
Jon:  Next, Jesus gives three examples of how religious devotion can go 
sideways. His examples are generosity to the poor,14 prayer,15 and fasting.16 
Tim:  In each of these, Jesus challenges his followers to express their devotion 
to God in subtle ways that don’t attract attention. Then, he completes this 
section by teaching about what the real reward is.
Jon:  Yeah. He says, “Don’t store up for yourself treasure on the land, but store 
up for yourself treasure in the sky.” So what is this sky treasure? 
Tim:  Well, this idea of treasure links back to Jesus’ opening claim that true 
righteousness brings a reward. The greatest treasure is not admiration 
from people; rather, the real reward is knowing and being known by the 
loving God of the universe.
Matthew 6:19-7:12: Righteousness and Relationships
Jon:  And that leaves this third and final perspective—how doing righteousness 
affects our relationships with God and neighbor. 
Tim:  Now, this section itself has three parts. First, Jesus talks about  
money and possessions.17
Jon:  Why start with money?
Tim:  Well, our stuff tends to claim our allegiance—and causes us to worry.  
And so our relationship to our stuff can be one of the biggest obstacles  
to healthy relationships with God and with other people. 
Jon:  Jesus teaches, “Don’t store up your stuff on the land; rather, store up 
treasure in the sky.” 
Tim:  Then, Jesus gives two parables. One is about two kinds of eyes you can 
have—a healthy, generous eye or an evil, stingy eye. The second parable 
focuses on two masters you can serve, God or money. Then, Jesus gives 
a beautiful homily about worry.18 Why chase after security from things 
that are ultimately insecure? Jesus invites us to trust the generous God of 
creation who cares about us more than we can imagine.
Jon:  That’s the first part. Next, Jesus directly addresses our relationships with 
God and neighbor.19 14. Matthew 6:1-4
15. Matthew 6:5-15
16. Matthew 6:16-18
17. Matthew 6:19-3405:12-07:22
04:59-05:0904:02-05:11
18. Matthew 6:25-34
19. Matthew 7:1-12Tim:  Yeah. This section begins with, “Do not judge others, or you too will be 
judged.” 20 Then come two more parables21—another about eyes, how you 
shouldn’t try to remove a speck out of someone else’s eye … 
Jon:  … When you have a log in your own.
Tim:  Then comes a parable about not tossing holy pearls to pigs and dogs. It’s a 
riddle with multiple meanings, but essentially, it’s about using discernment 
when we try to help and correct others. Then, because relationships are so 
complex, Jesus encourages his disciples to ask God for the wisdom they 
need—ask, seek, and knock, and the door will be opened for you. 
Jon:  This section of the Sermon on the Mount ends with the Golden Rule.  
“Do to others what you want them to do to you.” 22
Tim:  Jesus says that this simple teaching is what the Torah and Prophets are all 
about. And so the Golden Rule concludes the third perspective on doing 
righteousness. And it also links us back to the opening of the main body of 
the sermon, where Jesus said he came to bring the Torah and Prophets to 
their completion.
Matthew 7:13-27: The Three Choices
Jon:  Finally, we’re going to look at the last major section of the sermon,  
the conclusion. 
Tim:  Here, Jesus places a choice in front of his listeners about how they’re 
going to live their lives. 
Jon:  Now this section has three parts.
Tim:  And each one illustrates this choice with a different image. The first image 
is about two paths with two different gates—one leads to life and the other 
to ruin.23 Second is about discerning between two kinds of leaders who 
claim to represent God. They’re like two kinds of trees—one good and one 
bad. Not everyone who says they speak for God really does, but Jesus 
says you will know a tree by its fruit.24 The last image is about two types 
of houses you can build. If you ignore Jesus and build your house by your 
own wisdom, it’s like building on sand—and good luck when the storm 
comes. But if you listen to him and build your house with Jesus’ wisdom, 
you are building your house on a rock.25 And with that, the Sermon on the 
Mount comes to a close. 
Jon:  Okay, so let’s review the whole sermon. It  begins with the surprise 
announcement about how the good life of God’s Kingdom has come to 
the least likely people. And then, in the main body, Jesus teaches how to 
do right by God and others. And finally, the conclusion calls for a decision. 
In light of everything Jesus has said, what choice will you make? 
Tim:  That’s a great summary! Now it’s time to read—and then reread and reread 
again—the Sermon on the Mount.20. Matthew 7:1
21. Matthew 7:2-6
22. Matthew 7:12
07:23-08:44
23. Matthew 7:13-14
24. Matthew 7:15-23
25. Matthew 7:24-27