Water of Life
The River in the Garden  
Jon: If you go out into a desert, you’ll see why it's one of the most deadly, 
uninhabitable places on the planet. It’s dry, and where there’s no water, 
there’s no life. 
Tim: This is the picture that we get on page two of Genesis. The story begins 
with a dry and desolate wilderness,1  but God provides a spring in the 
desert that becomes a source of life for plants and animals.2
Jon: And that’s where God brings together a man and a woman, so that 
humanity can flourish and spread the life of the garden.3
Tim: Exactly. And that garden spring becomes a river that flows out to water 
the entire world. And there can be enough for everyone; it’s all a gift from 
God.
Jon: And this is great—humans in a lush garden. But as it turns out, they find a 
way to ruin it.
Humanity in the Wilderness 
Tim: Right. Despite all of this water that God provided, it’s like they still have 
a drought deep inside of them. This is an image of the human condition, 
how we’re always thirsty for more. 
Jon: But more of what?
Tim: Well, in this story, the humans want more wisdom to create more security 
and more control on their own terms.4  And tragically, it only leaves them 
more thirsty and suspicious of each other, and so they end up back in the 
wilderness.5
Jon: The humans have lost access to the water of life. 
Tim: And because of that, they can’t spread God’s life into the world. 
Jon: And so God needs to rescue them from the wilderness. 00:00–00:44
1. Genesis 1:2
2. Genesis 2:10-14
3. Genesis 2:15
00:45–01:22
4. Genesis 3:1-7
5. Genesis 3:22-24Jacob at the Well 
Tim: Yeah, like in the story of Jacob. His selfish scheming ruined his family 
relationships, so he has to run from his problems out into the wilderness. 
But there he finds a well, and he meets a woman.6  
Jon: This is like Eden—a man and a woman together by a source of water. 
Tim: Right! And then through Jacob, God creates the family of Israel. And he 
invites them to share in his own life, so that they can be his partners in 
spreading that life to others. And sometimes they do this.
Jon: But ultimately they struggle with the same drought of the soul, thirsting for 
more power, more control. And it leads them down a path of violence and 
self-ruin. 
Tim: And so they find themselves in a new wilderness, captive to other nations. 
Jon: All this effort to quench our own thirst on our own terms, it’s killing us. 
Promise of the Prophets 
Tim: Yeah, the biblical prophet Ezekiel described Israel in exile as a pile of dry 
bones scattered in a desert valley.7  But, he said, one day God will pour out 
his own life presence, his Spirit, to water the land, to create a new Eden 
and new kinds of humans.8  
Jon: People who can spread God’s life to others. 
Tim: Exactly, and so this brings us to the story of Jesus. 
Jesus: Living Water 
Jon: Right! And there’s a story about Jesus, who goes to a well that Jacob used 
to own.9
Tim: And just like in Jacob’s story, Jesus meets a woman, and he tells this 
woman that no matter how much water she drinks from this well, she’ll 
always thirst for more. Then he offers water that could quench her thirst 
forever. 10
Jon: He’s not talking about the well water.
Tim: No. What he was talking about is God’s own life that comes through him, 
to us, to satisfy our deepest thirsts. This is why later on Jesus said, “Let 
anyone who is thirsty come to me and drink.” 11 
Jon: This is cool, but it’s also a strange image—drinking from a person?
Tim: Totally. And it’s connected to another strange image we find in the story of 
Jesus’ death on the cross. 
Jon: A Roman soldier thrusts a spear into Jesus’ side, and there’s blood. But 
also, all this water flows out.12 01:23–02:11
6. Genesis 29
02:12–02:35
7. Ezekiel 37:1-2
8. Ezekiel 37:26-27, 
Ezekiel 47
02:36–04:29
9. John 4:1-45
10. John 4:10
11. John 7:37
12. John 19:34Tim: Yes. It’s an image showing how Jesus’ death is a fountain of life. From him, 
God’s own love, that would die for his enemies, flows down and out into 
the world. 
Jon: After Jesus was raised from the dead, we’re told that he sends the Spirit 
into his followers.13
Tim: Yes, to fill them up with God’s own life. This is why the apostle Paul said 
that when we join the current of God’s Spirit, the fruit of Eden starts 
growing in us: love and joy, patience and kindness, gentleness and self-
control.14  
Jon: People like that can create beautiful things in the world that bring life to 
others.
Tim: Yes, like little streams of God’s life that can come together and point 
forward to the beautiful scene that we find on the last page of the Bible. 
Jon: There’s a new river of life. 
Tim: Yes. It’s flowing out from God and into a renewed creation, bringing life to 
all wherever it goes.15 13. Acts 1:8
14. Galatians 5:16-26
15. Revelation 22:1-3