What is the Bible? 
Script References
Introduction  
Tim: The Bible  —it’s one of the most influential books in human history.
Jon: It explores the big questions of why we exist.
Tim: It’s inspired many people to do amazing things.
Jon: And confused many others.
Tim: And you’ve probably got one sitting around somewhere.
Jon: So what is the Bible actually?
What is the Bible?  
Tim: Well, the Bible is a small library of books that all emerged out of the history 
of the people of ancient Israel. And in one sense, they were just like any 
other ancient civilization. But among them were a long line of individuals 
called prophets, and they viewed Israel’s story as anything but ordinary. 
They saw it as a central part of what God was doing for all humanity. And 
these prophets were literary geniuses. 
Jon: Really?
Tim: Yeah. They expertly crafted the Hebrew language to write epic narratives, 
very sophisticated poetry. They were masters of metaphor and 
storytelling. And they leveraged all this to explore life’s most complicated 
questions about death and life and the human struggle. 
Jon: So there’s a lot of different authors writing this book.
Tim: Yeah, and these texts were produced over a thousand-year period, starting 
with Israel’s origins in Egypt, then leading up to their kingdom with their 
first temple. But eventually, they were conquered by the Babylonians, who 
took them away into exile. Then at a crucial moment in their history, many 
Israelites returned to their land. They built a second temple, they reformed 00:00–00:19
00:20–01:30their identity, and this is when the Jewish Scriptures begin to be formed 
into the shape that we have them today. 
The Jewish Bible  
Jon: Okay, the Jewish Bible. What’s in it? 
Tim: Well in Hebrew, it’s called by an acronym, TaNaK.
Tim: The “t” stands for torah, sometimes called “the law.” That's Israel’s five-
book foundation story. The “n” stands for nevi’im, the Hebrew word for 
“prophets.” And this section consists of the historical books that tell Israel’s 
story from the prophets’ point of view. Then you get the poetic books of 
the prophets themselves. The “k” stands for ketuvim, a Hebrew word for 
“writings.” This is a diverse collection of poetic books, wisdom books, and 
more narrative. And the Jewish people believe that through all of these 
literary works God speaks to his people.
Jon: Now, there were other Jewish writings being produced during this Second 
Temple period as well.
Tim: Yeah, a really diverse group of texts. And these too were highly valued 
in Jewish communities. And there was debate from ancient times 
about whether or not some of these should be considered part of their 
Scriptures. 
Jon: So this is a lot of different writings over a long period of time. Why did they 
put them all together like this?
Tim: Well all together, these texts tell an epic story about how God is working 
through these people to bring order and beauty out of the chaos of our 
world. And it all builds up to a hope for a new leader who would come and 
renew all creation. And then the TaNaK concludes and this leader never 
comes. 
Jon: So it is an expertly crafted work, but it’s missing an ending?
Tim: That’s exactly right. Now, a few centuries later, a Jewish prophet comes 
onto the scene named Jesus of Nazareth. He claimed he was carrying the 
TaNaK’s story forward. 
The New Testament and the Second Temple Literature  
Jon: Yeah, so Jesus did a bunch of cool stuff, was killed, but his followers 
claimed he was alive from the dead. 
Tim: Yeah. They said that Jesus was that long-awaited leader who would restore 
the world. And so these earliest followers, called apostles, they composed 
new literary works about the story of Jesus. They called these “good news” 
or “the Gospel.” They formed an account called Acts about the spread of 01:31–03:01
03:02–04:01the Jesus movement outside of Israel, and then they circulated letters to 
different Jesus communities all around the ancient world. 
Jon: And they saw these writings as part of the Scripture. 
Tim: Yeah. The apostles wrote all of this as the fulfillment of that epic story 
found in the TaNaK, and they were continuing the literary genius of the 
Jewish tradition. They also believed that God was speaking to his people 
through these texts alongside the Scriptures of Israel. 
Jon: So that’s the Old and New Testament. But what did the early Christians 
think of the other Second Temple literature?
Tim: Well, different groups had different views about some of these books, but 
we know they read them and valued these texts, because they passed 
them along with the Jewish Scriptures.
What’s in My Bible?  
Jon: Okay, so we’ve got the TaNaK, the Jewish Scriptures. We’ve got these 
other Second Temple period works then the writings of the apostles about 
Jesus. And that’s a lot of literature! So what’s in my Bible? 
Tim: So the Christian movement has taken different forms over two thousand 
years, and from the beginning, all Christians recognized the TaNaK and 
the New Testament as Scripture. And for centuries, much of the Second 
Temple literature was read as part of the biblical tradition. The Catholic 
church eventually made it official and called some of the books from this 
collection the Deutero-Canonical books. Some Orthodox churches used 
even more books from this Second Temple period. And then in the 1500s 
during the Reformation, Protestant Christians wanted to go back to the 
oldest writings of the prophets and apostles, so they accepted only the 
Old and New Testaments. 
Jon: Okay. I think I got it. But how does a collection of books produced over a 
thousand years by all these different authors tell one unified story? 
Tim: Yeah. That’s the question we’ll address in our next video.04:02–05:02