Shema: LORD 
Script References
Introduction  
For thousands of years, every morning and evening, Jewish people have 
prayed these well-known words as a way of expressing their devotion to God, 
they’re called the Shema. 
“Hear O Israel, the LORD is our God, the Lord is one, and as for you, you shall 
love the LORD your God with all of your heart, with all your soul, and with all 
your strength.”1  
We’re going to look at the second key word here, “LORD,” written in all capital 
letters. This is the personal name of Israel’s God.
The Personal Name of the God of Israel   
We first learn the meaning of this name in the story of Moses and the burning 
bush in the book of Exodus, chapter 3. God appears to Moses, and he 
commissions him to liberate the Israelites from slavery. And so Moses wonders, 
what if people ask the name of the god who has sent me? And so God 
responds, “Tell them ehyeh has sent me to you.” Now, that Hebrew word ehyeh  
means “I will be.” In other words, God’s name means that he is the one who is 
and who will be. God’s existence doesn’t depend on anyone or anything else. 
This god simply is.2  
But it will sound kind of strange for Moses to say to the Israelites, “‘I will be’ has 
sent me to you.” Only God can say “I will be.” So in the next sentence, God tells 
Moses the version he should say aloud. “Yahweh the God of our ancestors, he 
has sent me to you.”3  
Now that word Yahweh is the ancient Hebrew form of the verb “he will be.” And 
this is the personal name of the God of Israel. It appears over 6,500 times in 
the Old Testament. 00:00–00:28
1. Deuteronomy 6:4-5
00:29–01:32
2. Exodus 3:13-14
3. Exodus 3:15Honoring the Sacred Name  
Now here’s what’s interesting. Over the centuries, Israelites wanted to honor 
the sacred nature of this divine name. So as they read the Hebrew Bible aloud 
and they came to this name, they stopped saying Yahweh and instead started 
saying the Hebrew word for “Lord,” which is adonay.
Now this practice has been continued throughout the centuries, and so later, 
when people started translating the Bible into English, they adopted this same 
practice. Instead of spelling out the divine name, they translate it as LORD 
spelled in all capital letters.
Okay, you got that? Good, because there's more. Ancient Jewish scribes 
wanted to prevent anyone from even accidentally saying this name aloud when 
you read the Hebrew Bible, and so they came up with a visual device to remind 
you to make sure you say adonay. They took the four consonant letters of the 
divine name. These letters correspond to our English letters, YHWH. Then they 
inserted the three vowels from the word adonay and combined these together 
to create an artificial hybrid word, which if you pronounced it, it would say 
yahowah. But no Israelite ever said yahowah. It’s simply a visual reminder to say 
the word adonay.
Now it gets more interesting. Much later, Christian scribes came along who 
didn’t know that yahowah was an artificial word, and so they begin to say it 
aloud and spell it in their writings. This is the word that eventually entered into 
English as Jehovah. It’s a word many people still use today.
Yahweh 
But the main thing is, the word LORD in all capital letters is an indication of the 
divine name. Don’t confuse it with the word Lord in your English translations 
that’s not in all capital letters. That’s the actual Hebrew word adon, which 
just means “lord” or “master.” This word can refer to people like kings4   or the 
master of a servant,5   even a shepherd over his sheep.6   And sometimes biblical 
authors will use this word to refer to God, like in the phrases “the Lord of all the 
earth”7  or the “Lord of Lords.”8
But behind all of these words, Jehovah, LORD, adonay, stands the original 
divine name of the God of Israel. It refers to the one who was, who is, and who 
forever will be. 01:33–02:57
02:58–03:40
5. Isaiah 24:24. Jeremiah 22:18
6. 1 Kings 22:17
7. Psalm 97:5
8. Deuteronomy 10:17