Contents
What Is Anointing? 2
Who or What Gets Anointed in the Bible? 2
Anointing Oil, Liquid Life, and Eden 3
What's Special About the Oil? 4
Anointing and Eden Imagery 5
Water and Spirit in Genesis 1 and 2 5
Anointing With Water and Spirit 7
Israel’s Anointed Kings 8
The Anointing of Saul 8
The Anointed Line of David 10
Isaiah's Anointed Servant and His Servants 14
Key Questions About Isaiah 61 17
The Messiah in the Psalms 20
The Anointed One in the New Testament 23
The Suffering-Anointed Jesus 23
Sharing in Jesus' Anointing 27Anointing
Study NotesAnointing 2What Is Anointing?
Ancient Israel shared with its cultural neighbors the practice of pouring 
modified oil on the heads of individuals as a way of marking them and setting 
them apart for a sacred and special task. This practice is called “anointing,”  
and it was something that was done to kings, priests, and holy objects in 
ancient Israel.
Anointing is a key biblical theme that we first see in the opening pages in 
Genesis. It develops throughout the Hebrew Bible before pointing to Jesus 
Christ, or Jesus the anointed one.
Who or What Gets Anointed in the Bible?
People
Kings
• Anointed before they become king
• Saul (1 Sam. 9:15-16; 10:1)
• David (1 Sam. 16:1-13) 
• Jehu (2 Kgs. 9:1-6)
All three of these anointings are performed by  
prophets who are instructed by Yahweh.
• Samuel anointed Saul (1 Sam. 9:16)
• Samuel anointed David (1 Sam. 16)
• Elisha anointed Jehu (2 Kgs. 9:6)
• Anointed at their coronation
• David (2 Sam. 2:4; 5:3)
• Solomon (1 Kgs. 1:34, 39)
• Joash (2 Kgs. 11:12)
• Jehoahaz (2 Kgs. 23:30) 
Priests
• Aaron anointed by Moses (Exod. 29:6-7) 
• Aaron and his sons anointed by Moses (Lev. 8:9, 12)  Anointing 3Prophets
• Only one time is a prophet anointed to mark the beginning of his 
prophetic career. 
• Elisha who is to be anointed by Elijah (1 Kgs. 19:16),  
though it’s not clear if this ever happened. 
Places
• A pile of rocks  
• Jacob’s dream-vision at Bethel enables him to see this place as set 
apart, a Heaven-on–Earth spot (Gen. 28:10-22). The verb mashakh  is 
used for this “anointing” in a recollection of the story (Gen. 31:13).
Anointing Oil, Liquid Life, and Eden
Anointing is also used to mark the significance of holy spaces. In the book of 
Exodus, we read that every part of the tabernacle was to be anointed with oil.
25 “And you shall make of these a holy anointing oil,  
           a perfume mixture,  
           the work of a perfumer;  
    it shall be a holy anointing  oil.  
26 “With it you shall  anoint  
         the tent of meeting  
         and the ark of the testimony,  
           27and the table and all its utensils,  
         and the lampstand and its utensils,  
         28and the altar of incense,  
           and the altar of burnt offering and all its utensils,  
         and the basin and its stand.  
29 “You shall also mark them as holy,  
        so they become most holy;  
     whatever touches them shall be holy.  
30 “You shall anoint  Aaron and his sons,  
        and mark them as holy,  
     so that they may minister as priests to me.  
31 “You shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying,  
        ‘This shall be a holy  anointing  oil to me throughout your generations.  
        32 ‘It shall not be poured on anyone’s body,  
         nor shall you make any like it in the same proportions;  
         it is holy, and it shall be holy to you.’”
                                Exodus 30:25-32
10Moses then took the anointing  oil and anointed  the tabernacle and 
all that was in it, and consecrated them. 11He sprinkled some of it on 
the altar seven times and anointed the altar and all its utensils, and 
the basin and its stand, to consecrate them.
                                                                  Leviticus 8:10-11 (NASB95)Anointing 4Food offerings to be burned up on the altar were also anointed with oil.
4Now when you bring an offering of a grain offering baked 
in an oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mixed 
with oil, or unleavened wafers  anointed with oil .
                                                              Leviticus 2:4
12If he offers it by way of thanksgiving, then along with the 
sacrifice of thanksgiving he shall offer unleavened cakes 
mixed with oil, and unleavened wafers spread with oil, and 
cakes of well stirred fine flour mixed with oil.
Leviticus 7:12
What's Special About the Oil?
There was a specific type of oil that was used in anointings, and it is described 
one time in the Bible.
22Moreover, the Lord spoke to Moses, saying,  
23 “Take also for yourself the finest of spices:  
          flowing myrrh , five hundred shekels,  
          and fragrant cinnamon , half as much, two hundred  
          and fifty, and  fragrant cane , two hundred and fifty,  
          and cassia , 24five hundred, according to the shekel of  
          the sanctuary, and olive oil , a hin.  
25and you shall make of these a holy anointing oil,  
          a perfume mixture,   
          the work of a perfumer;     
          it shall be a holy anointing  oil. "
Exodus 30:22–25 (NASB95)
The Ingredients
• Myrrh is a southern Arabian gum-resin that has a strong aromatic smell. 
The resin flows out of trees unique to the region. 
• Cinnamon is made from a tree indigenous to modern Sri-Lanka (aka Ceylon). 
• Aromatic cane’s origin is unknown precisely, but a cane/reed plant is 
known for its strong smell (Jeremiah mentions this plant [Jer. 6:20] as 
coming from a distant land).
• Cassia is also a bit uncertain (Heb. kiddah ). This Hebrew word was 
translated by early Aramaic Targums as the Cassia plant (Aram. qetsi’ata ), 
an aromatic bark from an east Asian evergreen tree.  Anointing 5Anointing and Eden Imagery
The anointing oil described in the Bible has clear hyperlinks to Eden and garden 
imagery. These connections to the Eden narrative are a key reason why this 
oil was used to mark spaces and people who represented the overlapping of 
Heaven and Earth.
• The anointing oil was a super condensed product of garden trees and oils. 
• It was filled with aromatic garden smells that a person would never 
encounter in the daily course of life. It would smell “otherworldly.”
• It is poured upon the three types of Heaven-on-Earth people.
• Priests who represent and mediate between God and the people
• The king who represents the rule and wisdom of God to the people
• The prophets who mediate the word and will of God to the people
• The one poetic exploration we have of the anointing oil connects 
it explicitly to the garden of Eden in Psalm 133.
Water and Spirit in Genesis 1 and 2
To truly understand the symbolic meaning of the anointing oil, we have to go 
back to Genesis 1-2 and see the roots of the idea in the stories of creation  
(Gen. 1:1-2:3) and Eden (Gen. 2:4-3:24).
Genesis 1:1-2:3
In the opening lines of the seven-day creation story, we begin with the pre-creation state, 
depicted with the image of the chaos-waters (too much water) and darkness. But those  
“non-creation” elements are confronted by Yahweh’s Spirit.
Out of the waters, Yahweh’s Spirit and word call forth the dry land and garden plants, 
especially fruit trees.
A1In the beginning, Elohim  created 
the skies
and the land
B2Now, the land  was wild and waste
and darkness  was over the face  of the deep
A' But the Spirit-wind of Elohim  was hovering over the face  of the watersAnointing 6Genesis 2:4-17
In the opening lines of the Eden story, we begin with the opposite scenario. The pre-creation 
state is depicted as a chaos-desert (not enough water). But this “non-creation” wilderness is 
confronted by Yahweh’s “water.”
Out of the wilderness, God calls a garden and humans into being with his water and Spirit.
Aa      2:4aThese are the birthings of the skies and of the land,
b     when they were created.
b’     2:4bIn the day  of Yahweh Elohim making
a’     land and skies,
a     5and any shrub of the field  was not yet  in the land,
a’     and any plant of the field  was not yet  sprouted ,
b      for Yahweh Elohim had not sent rain upon the land,
a      and a human  there was not to work the ground,
b     6and a stream  would go up from the land,
a’     and it would water  the whole face of the ground,
       7And Yahweh Elohim formed the humans  of dust from the ground,
a      and he breathed into his nostrils the breath of life;
        and the human became a living  being.
       8And Yahweh Elohim planted a garden  in Eden, toward the east [or: from of old],
b      and he placed there  the human who he had formed .
       9And Yahweh Elohim cause to sprout  from the ground 
a’     every tree  that is desirable to sight and good for eating ;
        and the tree of life also in the middle of the garden ,
        and the tree of the knowing of good and bad .
Ba    10Now, a river went out from Eden to water  the garden ;
        and from there it separated and became four heads:
      11The name of the first is Pishon;
        it goes around the whole land of Havilah,
        which had gold there ,
      12and the gold of  that land  is good;
        the bdellium and the onyx stone are there .
b 
      13And the name of the second  river  is Gihon;
        it goes around the whole land of Cush.
      14And the name of the third  river  is Tigris;
        it goes east of Assyria.
a’      and the fourth  river ,
         it is the Euphrates.
A'        15And Yahweh Elohim took the human
         and he rested him  in the garden of Eden
         to serve it and to keep it.
        16And Yahweh Elohim commanded the human , saying,
 
        “From every tree  of the garden
         you will eat-eat ;
        17but from the tree of the knowing of good and bad
         you will not eat  from it ,
         for in the day  that you eat from it,
         you will die-die .”Anointing 7Anointing With Water and Spirit
In Genesis 2, God’s Spirit and water are paired together in analogy. The water 
brings forth a garden out of the wilderness.
From this point on in the biblical story, God's Spirit/water pouring out upon a 
place or person becomes interchangeable imagery for God filling a person/
place that is, on its own, lifeless, and marking it as filled with the life of Heaven. 
Human Images as Portals
In Genesis 2, God appointed a human image to steward and care for the garden on God’s behalf.
The human is summoned up out of the dirt, but then God pours out his very life-breath 
into the dirt (Spirit // liquid) and then plants a garden and places the human in the garden 
as a divine image.
By being anointed through water and then Spirit, humans are marked as “portals” between 
Heaven and Earth, God and creation, so that God’s presence, purpose and will, and wise rule  
are mirrored and reflected on Earth. 
The humans that are anointed in the biblical story represent God’s presence on earth.  
The priests, who allow for communion between God and his people, are like portals of God’s 
presence. The prophets are called to communicate God’s will and messages to humans and act 
as portals to his purpose. And the kings are to act as images of God’s wise rule—though they 
rarely succeed at this.
The Garden Ideal
The garden is portrayed in the biblical story as the place where Heaven and Earth are one—the 
divine and human living together in harmony. Just like humans, the garden was brought into 
existence by water and Spirit.
Gardens were places of cultivated abundance, full of exotic smells and tastes, where one could 
work in peace and rest, trusting in the abundance of fruit and water.
The fact that Israel’s later tabernacle and temple were filled with garden imagery and 
inaugurated with a special oil suggests that the anointing oil was a liquid symbol of that first 
water + Spirit association in the Eden story. 
Genesis 2 creates a fundamental analogy between water (in the wilderness) as a source of life 
and Spirit as a source of life. The Hebrew prophets drew on this symbolism and saw the clear 
connection between water and Spirit. Anointing 828It will come about after this  
That I will pour out my Spirit on all humanity ;  
And your sons and daughters will prophesy,  
Your old men will dream dreams,  
Your young men will see visions.  
29Even on the male and female servants  
I will pour out my Spirit in those days.
Joel 2:28-29 (NASB95)
15Until the Spirit is poured out upon us  from on high,  
And the wilderness becomes a fertile field,  
And the fertile field is considered as a forest.  
16Then justice will dwell in the wilderness  
And righteousness will abide in the fertile field.  
17And the work of righteousness will be peace,  
And the service of righteousness, quietness and confidence forever.  
18Then my people will live in a peaceful habitation,  
And in secure dwellings and in undisturbed resting places; 
Isaiah 32:15-18 (NASB95)
2Thus says the Lord who made you  
And formed you from the womb, who will help you,  
"Do not fear, O Jacob my servant;  
And you Jeshurun whom I have chosen.  
3For I will pour out water  on the thirsty land  
      And streams on the dry ground;  
  I will pour out my Spirit  on your offspring  
       And my blessing  on your descendants;  
4And they will spring up among the grass  
Like poplars by streams of water. "
Isaiah 44:2-4 (NASB95)
Israel’s Anointed Kings
The Anointing of Saul
In Genesis 2, God’s Spirit and water are paired together in analogy. The water 
brings forth a garden out of the wilderness.
1Then Samuel took a flask of oil and poured it over his head 
and kissed him and said, “Has not Yahweh anointed you as 
leader over his inheritance?”
1 Samuel 10:1 (LEB)15Now Yahweh had revealed this to Samuel the day before Saul 
arrived, saying, 16 “This time tomorrow I will send to you a man 
from the land of Benjamin, and you must anoint  him as leader 
over my people Israel. He will deliver my people from the hand 
of the Philistines. For I have seen the suffering of my people, 
because their cry of distress has come to me.”
1 Samuel 9:15-16 (LEB)Anointing 9And the Spirit of God “comes” upon him.
And when Saul hears about a “snakey” attack on Israel, the Spirit empowers him to take  
out the snake.
Saul is being portrayed here as a new Adam, anointed by the Spirit of God to clear the land of 
snakes so that his people can enjoy the Eden-land of Canaan in peace.
8He mustered them at Bezek; the Israelites were three hundred thousand, and 
the men of Judah were thirty thousand. 9They said to the messengers who had 
come, “Thus you will say to the men of Jabesh Gilead: ‘Tomorrow deliverance 
for you will come when the sun is hot.’” When the messengers went and told 
the men of Jabesh, they rejoiced. 10The men of Jabesh said, “Tomorrow we will 
come out to you and you may do to us whatever seems good to in your eyes .” 
11And the next day Saul placed the people in three divisions. Then they came 
into the middle of the camp at the early morning watch and struck down the 
Ammonites until the heat of the day. It happened that the remainder were 
scattered so that no two among them remained together. 
1 Samuel 11:8-11 (NASB95)
It’s only after this deliverance that the Israelites appoint Saul as king publicly.
15So all the people went to Gilgal,  and there they made Saul king before 
the Lord  in Gilgal. There they also offered sacrifices of peace offerings 
before the Lord; and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly. 
1 Samuel 11:15 (NASB95)9Just as he turned his shoulder to depart from Samuel, God changed his 
heart. And all these signs were fulfilled on that day.
10When they went from there to Gibeah, a procession of prophets met him, 
and the Spirit  of God rushed upon him, and he prophesied among them.                                      
   1 Samuel 10:9-10 (LEB)
5Just then, Saul was coming from the field behind the cattle. 
Saul said, “What is the matter with the people, that they are 
weeping?” So they recounted to him the words of the men of 
Jabesh. 6Then the Spirit of God rushed upon Saul  when he 
heard these words, and he became very angry.                                             
                                                  1 Samuel 11:5-6 (LEB)1Now Nahash the Ammonite  went up and encamped against 
Jabesh Gilead. All the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, “Make 
a treaty with us and we will serve you.” 2But Nahash the 
Ammonite said to them, “On this condition I will make a 
treaty with you, by gouging out the right eye  of each of  
you, so that I can make it a disgrace for all Israel.”                                      
                                                  1 Samuel 11:1-2 (LEB)Anointing 10But then, through a series of events in 1 Samuel 12-15, Saul fails to trust Yahweh, violates his 
commands twice, and is rejected as king. 
26But Samuel said to Saul, “I will not return with you; for you have rejected the 
word of the Lord, and the Lord has rejected you from being king over Israel. ”  
27As Samuel turned to go, Saul seized the edge of his robe, and it tore. So Samuel 
said to him, 28 “The Lord has torn the kingdom of Israel from you today and has 
given it to your neighbor, who is more good than you. ”  
1 Samuel 15:26-28 (NASB95)
The Anointed Line of David
David is anointed secretly as king in place of Saul.
12So he sent and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, with beautiful eyes and a 
handsome appearance. And the Lord said, “Arise, anoint him; for this is he.” 
13Then Samuel took the horn of oil and anointed him  in the midst of his 
brothers; and the Spirit of the Lord came mightily upon David  from that day 
forward. And Samuel arose and went to Ramah. 
1 Samuel 16:12-13 (NASB95)
Like Saul, David also hears the words of another snakey-figure, Goliath the giant Philistine 
warrior. Goliath is presented as a snake-giant (like the Eden snake of Gen. 3 and the Nephilim 
warriors of Gen. 6).
4Then a champion came out from the armies of the Philistines named Goliath, from 
Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span. 5He had a bronze helmet on his 
head, and he was clothed with scale-armor  which weighed five thousand shekels of 
bronze. 6He also had bronze greaves on his legs and a bronze javelin slung between 
his shoulders. 
7The shaft of his spear was like a weaver’s beam, and the head of his spear weighed 
six hundred shekels of iron; his shield-carrier also walked before him. 8He stood and 
shouted to the ranks of Israel and said to them, “Why do you come out to draw up 
in battle array? Am I not the Philistine and you servants of Saul? Choose a man for 
yourselves and let him come down to me. 9 “If he is able to fight with me and kill me, 
then we will become your servants; but if I prevail against him and kill him, then you 
shall become our servants and serve us.” 
10Again the Philistine said, “I publicly shame/taunt  the ranks of Israel this day; give 
me a man that we may fight together.” 11When Saul and all Israel heard these words 
of the Philistine, they were dismayed and greatly afraid.
1 Samuel 17:4-11Anointing 1122Then David left his baggage in the care of the baggage keeper and ran to the 
battle line and entered in order to greet his brothers. 
23As he was talking with them, behold, the champion, the Philistine from Gath 
named Goliath, was coming up from the army of the Philistines, and he spoke these 
same words; and David heard them. When all the men of Israel saw the man, they 
fled from him and were greatly afraid …  24Then David spoke to the men who were 
standing by him, saying, “What will be done for the man who kills this Philistine and 
takes away the reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that 
he should bring public shame on  the armies of the living God?”  
1 Samuel 17:22-24
Saul and his warriors hear the words of the snake-giant, and they are afraid. This is in 
contrast to David, who hears the words of the snake-giant and is brave and seeks to defend 
the name of Yahweh.
Again echoing Genesis, David compares Goliath to the beasts of the field.
33Then Saul said to David, “You are not able to go against this Philistine to fight 
with him; for you are but a youth while he has been a warrior from his youth.” 
34But David said to Saul, “Your servant was tending his father’s sheep. When a 
lion or a bear  came and took a lamb from the flock, 35I went out after him and 
attacked him, and rescued it from his mouth; and when he rose up against me, I 
seized him by his beard and struck him and killed him. 36Your servant has killed 
both the lion and the bear ; and this uncircumcised Philistine will be like one of 
them, since he has publicly shamed the armies of the living God.” 
37And David said,  
 “The Lord who delivered me  
          from  the paw of the lion and from the paw of the bear,  
   He will deliver me  
          from the hand of this Philistine .”  
 And Saul said to David, “Go, and may the Lord be with you.” 
1 Samuel 17:33-37
David’s speech shows total trust in Yahweh’s power.
43So the Philistine said to David, “Am I a dog, that you are coming to me with sticks?” Then the 
Philistine cursed David by his gods. 44The Philistine said to David, “Come to me so that I can give 
your flesh to the birds of heaven and to the wild animals of the field!” 
45Then David said to the Philistine, “ You are coming to me with a sword and with a spear and with 
a javelin, but I am coming to you in the name of Yahweh of hosts , the God of the battle lines of 
Israel, whom you have publicly shamed ! 46This day, Yahweh will deliver you into my hand, and I will 
strike you down and cut off your head! Then I will give the corpses of the army of the Philistines 
this day to the birds of heaven and to the animals of the earth, so that all the earth may know that 
there is a God who is for Israel. 47And all of this assembly will know that Yahweh does not rescue 
with sword or with spear, for the battle belongs to Yahweh, and he will give you into our hands!”  
1 Samuel 17:43-47 (LEB)Anointing 12David “strikes the head” of the snake-giant.
50So David prevailed over the Philistine with the sling and with the stone, 
and he struck down the Philistine and killed him, but there was no sword 
in David’s hand. 51Then David ran and stood over the Philistine and took his 
sword and drew it from its sheath and killed him and cut off his head with it . 
When the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled.  
1 Samuel 17:50-51 (LEB)
From here, Saul becomes jealous at God’s elevation of David, and he begins to persecute David 
and attempt to kill him (1 Sam.18-23).
• David // Adam = the anointed one
• Saul // Cain // the snake = the anti-anointed (anti-christ)  
In 1 Samuel 24, David is fleeing in the wilderness from Saul, and David finds Saul in a cave (a 
symbol for an Eden-like refuge). This is David’s great test. He doesn’t “stretch out his hand” and 
“do this thing,” “do what is good in his eyes” (1 Sam. 24:4, 6) (Recall Adam and Eve stretching 
out their hand and taking from the tree).
David’s reason for not killing Saul in the cave is that he “will not do this thing to Yahweh’s 
anointed one, to stretch out my hand against him.” David knows that the real power of Heaven 
is in showing mercy and waiting for God to bring his Kingdom—not in taking life. This is the 
real power of God’s anointed one.  
2 Samuel 7 says that David’s future seed will be the one to plant Israel in a new Eden land.
     And now, thus you shall say to my servant David,  
     8 ‘Thus says Yahweh of hosts,  
     “I took you from the pasture, from behind the sheep, to be ruler over my people Israel.  
     9I have been with you wherever you have gone  
      And I have cut off all your enemies from before you;  
      And I will make you a great name,  
        Like the names of the great men who are on the land  
  10I will also appoint a place for my people Israel  
      And I will plant them,  
        That they may live in their own place  
        And they will not be disturbed again,  
        Nor will the wicked afflict them any more as formerly,  
  11Even from the day that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel;  
     And I will give you rest from all your enemies.  
     And Yahweh declares to you that the Lord will make a house for you.  
  12When your days are complete and you lie down with your fathers,  
      I will raise up your seed after you,  
      Who will come out of your belly,  
      And I will establish his kingdom.  
  13And he will build a house for my name,  
     And I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever. ”
2 Samuel 7:8-13 Anointing 13When David looks back over his life, he recounts the  many times that Yahweh came to deliver 
him and elevate him over his enemies. And he anticipates that this is how Yahweh will deal with 
his future seed.
47Yahweh lives! Blessed be my rock!  
  May God, the rock of my salvation, be exalted!  
48God does vengeance for me,  
   Bringing down peoples under me.  
49He brings me out from my enemies,  
   And from those who rose up against me you lift me up,  
   And from men of violence you rescue me.  
50Therefore I will extol you, Yahweh, among the nations!  
    I will sing praises to your name!  
51He makes great deliverance for his king,  
   And he shows loyal love to his anointed one,  
   To David and to his seed forever.
2 Samuel 22:47-51
Within the TaNaK, the stories of David and Saul recall the past stories of Adam and Eve in the 
garden and also point forward, offering a template for Yahweh’s anointed one from the future 
line of David. Anointing 14Isaiah's Anointed Servant and His Servants
The promise in 2 Samuel 7 about David’s future seed, who will be for Israel what David was in his 
day, is key for understanding the Isaiah scroll.
In chapter 11, the Isaiah scroll picks up this promise of a future seed of David and develops 
it into a future hope for Israel and the nations. The sprout of Jesse (David’s father) will be 
empowered by the Spirit to be the ultimate deliverer.
1And a shoot will come out from the stump of Jesse,  
And a branch from its roots will bear fruit.  
2And the spirit of Yahweh shall rest on him—  
A spirit of wisdom and understanding,  
A spirit of counsel and might,  
3A spirit of knowledge and the fear of Yahweh.  
And his breath/smell is in the fear of Yahweh.  
And he shall judge not by his eyesight,  
And he shall rebuke not by what he hears with his ears.  
4But he shall judge the poor with righteousness,  
And he shall decide for the needy of the earth with rectitude.  
And he shall strike the earth with the rod of his mouth,  
And he shall kill the wicked person with the breath of his lips.  
5And righteousness shall be the belt around his waist,  
And faithfulness the belt around his loins.  
6And a wolf shall stay with a lamb,  
And a leopard shall lie down with a kid,  
And a calf and a lion and a fatling together as a small boy leads them.  
7And a cow and a bear shall graze;  
Their young shall lie down together.  
And a lion shall eat straw like the cattle.  
8And an infant shall play over a serpent’s hole,  
And a toddler shall put his hand on a viper’s hole.  
9They will not injure and they will not destroy on all of my holy mountain,  
For the earth will be full of the knowledge of Yahweh, as the waters cover the sea.  
10And this shall happen on that day:  
The nations shall inquire of the root of Jesse,  
Which shall be standing as a signal to the peoples,  
And his resting place shall be glorious.
Isaiah 11:1-10 (LEB)Anointing 15In this promise, the focus is on the one anointed lineage of David, who will produce a new 
David-like king to rule over the many with justice.
1 “Behold, my Servant, whom I uphold;  
My chosen one in whom my soul delights.  
I have put my Spirit upon him ;  
He will bring forth justice to the nations.  
2He will not cry out or raise his voice,  
Nor make his voice heard in the street.  
3A bruised reed he will not break  
And a dimly burning wick he will not extinguish;  
He will faithfully bring forth justice.  
4He will not be disheartened or crushed  
Until he has established justice in the earth;  
And the coastlands will wait expectantly for his law.” 
5Thus says God the Lord,  
Who created the heavens and stretched them out,  
Who spread out the earth and its offspring,  
Who gives breath to the people on it  
And spirit to those who walk in it,  
6 “I am the Lord, I have called you in righteousness,  
I will also hold you by the hand and watch over you,  
And I will appoint you as a covenant to the people,  
As a light to the nations,  
7To open blind eyes,  
To bring out prisoners from the dungeon  
And those who dwell in darkness from the prison.  
8I am the Lord, that is my name;  
I will not give my glory to another,  
Nor my praise to graven images.  
9Behold, the former things have come to pass,  
Now I declare new things;  
Before they spring forth I proclaim them to you.” 
Isaiah 42:1-9 (NASB95)
Later in the Isaiah scroll, the focus shifts to the many seeds and how they will become the 
“anointed ones” of God. How will that happen?
2Thus says the Lord who made you  
And formed you from the womb, who will help you,  
 "Do not fear, O Jacob my servant;  
And you Jeshurun whom I have chosen.  
3For I will pour out water  on the thirsty land  
      And streams on the dry ground;  
  I will pour out my Spirit on your offspring  
       And my blessing  on your descendants;  
4And they will spring up among the grass  
Like poplars by streams of water. "
Isaiah 44:2-4 (NASB95)Anointing 16In Isaiah 61, we again see this idea of God’s anointing Spirit. This passage is full of Genesis 2 hyperlinks 
and is a key messianic text, the words of which we see Jesus famously quote in Luke 4. 
1The Spirit  of the Lord God is upon me,  
Because the LORD anointed me  
To bring good news to the humble;  
He has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted,  
To proclaim release to captives  
And freedom to prisoners;  
 
2To proclaim the favorable year of the LORD  
And the day of vengeance of our God;  
To comfort all who mourn,  
 
3To grant those who mourn in Zion,  
Giving them a garland instead of ashes,  
The oil of gladness  instead of mourning,  
The cloak of praise instead of a disheartened spirit.  
So they will be called oaks of righteousness,  
The planting of the LORD, that he may be glorified.  
 
4Then they will rebuild the ancient ruins,  
They will raise up the former devastations;  
And they will repair the ruined cities,  
The desolations of many generations.  
 
5Strangers will stand and pasture your flocks,  
And foreigners will be your farmers and your vinedressers.  
6But you will be called the priests of the LORD;  
You will be spoken of as ministers of our God.  
You will eat the wealth of nations,  
And you will boast in their riches.  
 
7Instead of your shame you will have a double portion,  
And instead of humiliation they will shout for joy over their portion.  
Therefore they will possess a double portion in their land,  
Everlasting joy will be theirs.  
 
8For I, the LORD, love justice,  
hate robbery in the burnt offering;  
And I will faithfully give them their reward,  
And make an everlasting covenant with them.  
 
9Then their offspring will be known among the nations,  
And their descendants in the midst of the peoples.  
All who see them will recognize them  
Because they are the offspring whom the LORD has blessed.  
 
10I will rejoice greatly in the LORD,  
My soul will be joyful in my God;  
For he has clothed me with garments of salvation,  
He has wrapped me with a robe of righteousness,  
As a groom puts on a turban,  
And as a bride adorns herself with her jewels.  
 
11For as the earth produces its sprouts,  
And as a garden causes the things sown in it to spring up,  
So the Lord God will cause righteousness and praise  
To spring up before all the nations. 
Isaiah 61:1-11 NASBAnointing 17Yahweh has anointed one for the sake of the many so that his royal-priestly anointing can 
transfer to the afflicted ones, and they can take up his royal-priestly identity as their own and 
become honored among the nations and be sources of renewal and restoration.
Key Questions About Isaiah 61
Who is the “anointed” speaker of 61:1?
• Option A: The Davidic king of 11:2:  (1) “anointing” is primarily used to 
describe kings (1 Sam. 16:13); (2) the king of Isaiah 11:1-3 was spirit-
empowered; (3) there are many other allusions to Isaiah 11 in Isaiah 60-62.
• 60:21: “the branch of his planting” // 11:1 “a branch will spring up”
• 62:10a: “build up a highway” // 11:16 “there will be a highway for 
the remnant of his people”
• 62:10b: “raise up a banner for the peoples” // 11:10 “the root of 
Jesse will stand like a banner for the peoples”
• Problems:  Nowhere else does the “king” of Isaiah 1-39 reappear 
as such in Isaiah 40-66. Isaiah 55:3-5 reconfigured the “covenant 
promised to David” to apply to the temple restoration among the 
community of returned exiles.
• Option B: The prophetic servant/s of Isaiah 49-55 who has appropriated 
the role of Israel’s Davidic king
• The Spirit-endowment of Isaiah 61:1 adopts the royal (Isa. 11:1-
3) and prophetic (Isa. 42:1; 48:16b) role of the servant and his 
community (Isa. 44:2-3).
• "Good news for the poor" makes this figure one of the heralds of 
restoration to Zion (Isa. 40:9; 41:27; 52:7). The herald of good news 
to the exiles about the return to Zion has become a herald of good 
news to Zion about its restoration.  
What is the mission of the “anointed” one?
• Isaiah 61:1a: “good news for the poor/afflicted”  (Isa. 49:13: “Yahweh 
will comfort his people, and show compassion on his afflicted ones; Isa. 
41:17: “the afflicted ones look for water … I Yahweh will answer them”; 
Isa. 48:10: “I chose you in the furnace of affliction”; affliction refers to the 
community that has suffered in the exile to Babylon and has return to 
harsh conditions (Isa. 58))
• Isaiah 61:1b: “to bind up the broken-hearted”  (This term is rare and 
appears elsewhere only in Ps. 34:19; 51:19; 147:3 [“who heals the broken-
hearted and binds up their wounds”], all referring to exile)
• Isaiah 61:1c-2a: “to proclaim release for the captives and opening-up for 
the prisoners”  (This is Jubilee tradition language from Lev. 25:10 [“you shall 
proclaim release in the land for all its inhabitants”]; slavery/imprisonment 
was the main image of oppression and exile in Isa. 1-39 and 40-55)Anointing 18• Isaiah 40:2: “she has received from the Lord’s hand double for all her sins” 
• Jeremiah 16:18: “for I will first repay them double for their iniquities 
and sins for their defilement of my land” 
• Isaiah 61:7: “instead of shame, I will give a double portion, and 
instead of reproach, they will rejoice in their inheritance, for in 
their land they will inherit a double portion”
• Israel’s exile from the land was viewed as a form of debt-
slavery from which they needed a Jubilee redemption.  
“After the exile, if not already long before, the social and economic conditions of ancient 
agrarian tribal Israel, for which the jubilee was appropriate, were hopelessly destroyed, 
and a re-implementation of the jubilee legislation was unworkable even had it been 
desired. Nonetheless, scriptural authors subsequent to the exile remained convinced that 
the sacral laws retained relevance… and based on this conviction they began to treat the 
Jubilee law as prophecy  by means of symbolic, or typological interpretation. In their view, 
the jubilee texts referred not only to poor Israelites who fell into debt-slavery. Rather, the 
individual whose plight was addressed in Leviticus 25:25-55 became a corporate symbol 
of the people of Israel as a whole, who had fallen into debt with the Lord by failing to 
observe the Torah, and so had become enslaved to various foreign powers and alienated 
from their ancestral land.” 
Bergsma, John (2006). The Jubilee from Leviticus to Qumran.  Brill. 298-99. 
• 61:2: “to proclaim the year of Yahweh’s favor and the day of 
vengeance” (Isa. 49:8: “in the time of favor I answered you, and in 
the day of salvation I helped you”)
• Isaiah 61 is combining two roles of the “redeemer” in the 
Torah, the redeemer of slaves and enslaved land (Lev. 25, 
27) and the blood-avenger who repays enemies for innocent 
bloodshed (Num. 35; Deut. 19).  
“Behind this theological imagery is the typological association of the Babylonian 
exile with the Egyptian captivity. Just as Yahweh brought the people out of Egypt 
by bringing plagues (= vengeance) upon the Egyptians, so he will also liberate his 
people from Babylon through vengeance. In Isaiah 40-55 this exodus imagery has 
been combined with the depiction of debt-slavery to bring about the picture of 
Yahweh as Israel’s ‘redeemer,’ that is, the one who both restores and avenges.” 
Gregory, Bradley C. (2007). “The Post-exilic Exile in Third Isaiah.”  
Journal of Biblical Literature, Volume 126 (No. 3) . 487.Anointing 19“Just as Isaiah 40-55 understood the Babylonian exile as an antitype of the Egyptian 
captivity, so Isaiah 56-66 placed his own situation in Jerusalem after the exile in 
relationship to the other two. One gets the impression that the author does not see 
the situation back in post-exilic Palestine as appreciably better than the situation 
in Babylon, or in ancient Egypt. In all cases, Israel remains “shackled” because of 
sin and awaits deliverance by Yahweh. Also, the prescriptions for the Jubilee year 
have been eschatologized. By employing a typological relationship between the 
enslaved Israelite of Leviticus 25 and the entire post-exilic community, Isaiah 56-
66 has moved the concept of the Jubilee from a legal prescription to an image of 
eschatological deliverance, and this is the same kind of hermeneutical move we 
find in other Second Temple texts.”
Gregory, Bradley C. (2007). “The Post-exilic Exile in Third Isaiah.”  
Journal of Biblical Literature, Volume 126 (No. 3) . 488.
“Isaiah 61:1-3 represents one of the earliest attestations of the phenomenon of 
understanding the exile as an ongoing state, that is, understanding the exile 
theologically rather than just historically.” 
Gregory, Bradley C. (2007). “The Post-exilic Exile in Third Isaiah.”  
Journal of Biblical Literature, Volume 126 (No. 3) . 488.
Who listens and receives good news from the servant herald?
• The “mourners of Zion” who are comforted (Isa. 61:2-3) and become the rebuilders/
restorers (Isa. 61:4-5) and who are the “priests” of the new Zion (Isa. 61:6) receive 
good news.
• These are the ones who will receive the “wealth of the nations” (Isa. 61:6, 60:5, 16) 
and be doubly restored (Isa. 61:7, 40:1-2).
• These will be vindicated by Yahweh (Isa. 61:8b. 40:10) and participate in the new 
covenant (Isa. 61:8b = Isa. 55:3 “I will make with y’all an eternal covenant”).
• These are the “seed” who are blessed by Yahweh (Isa. 61:9; Gen. 12:1-3) and become 
a beacon of divine hope among the nations (Isa. 49:6).Anointing 20The Messiah in the Psalms
The book of Psalms often connects the future Messiah with one who will be 
anointed with oil and Spirit to deliver God’s people. 
Psalm 2:1-12
a    1Why do the nations  roar ,
        And the peoples  meditate  on empty matters?
       2 The Kings  of the land take their stand,
b     And the rulers  take counsel together
        Against Yahweh
        And against his anointed one , saying ,
c      3 ”Let us tear apart their bonds,
         And let’s cast off their cords from us!”Verses 1-3: The Poet Describes the Kings’ Rebellion
a - The nations roar
b - They rebel against Yahweh
c - Their rebellious speech
a’    4The one sitting in the skies, he laughs,
        Yahweh  mocks  at them,
b’     5Then he will speak to them  in his anger
         And  in his hot-anger  he will terrify them, saying ,
c’     6 ”As for me,  I have anointed my King ,
         Upon Zion, my holy mountain.”Verse s 4-6 : Yahweh’s Response
a’ - Yahweh laughs
b’ - He responds in anger
c’ - Yahweh’s counter speech
7”I will surely tell of the decree of Yahweh:
           He said to me,
           ‘You are my Son,
           Today I have begotten you.
           8Ask of me,
           And I will give  the nations  as your inheritance,
           And the ends of the land  as your possession.
                  9You shall break them with a rod of iron,
           And like a potter’s vessel, you shall shatter them.’ “Verses 7-9: The Anointed King Tells Us About Yahweh’s Decree
1. Divine sonship
2. Kingdom over all nations
3. Victory over enemies
10And now, kings , show discernment;
          Be warned, O judges of the land .
          11Serve Yahweh  with fear,
          And rejoice with trembling.
         12Kiss  the Son ,
         Lest he become angry ,
         And you perish in the way,
         For his wrath  burns in an instant,
         O the good life of all who take refuge in him!Verses 10-12: The Poet’s Warning to the Rebellious Kings
 Anointing 21Psalm 22:1-31
1For the choir director: On “Doe of the Dawn,” A Psalm related to David
2My God, my God , why have you abandoned me?  
Far from  my rescue are the words of my cry  
3My God , I cry out  to you by day, but you do not answer  
And by night, but there is no rest for me.
A4Now as for you,  are holy  
O you who dwell among the praises of Israel.  
5In you our fathers  trusted  
They trusted  and you rescued  them.  
6To you they cried out and they were rescued  
In you they trusted  and were not ashamed
B7But as for me, I  am a worm, and not a man  
Scorned by others, and despised by people.  
8All who see me mock me;  
They abuse with their mouths;  
They shake their heads.  
9”He depended upon Yahweh,  
Let him  save  him,  
Let him deliver  him,  
For he [Yahweh] delights in him.”
A'10For you  are the one who brought me forth from the womb  
Who made me secure on my mother’s breast.  
11Upon you I was cast from the womb;  
From the womb of my mother, you were my God . 
12Do not be far from  me 
For distress is near;  
For there is no one  to help.
13Many bulls  surround me ; 
The strong bulls of Bashan  encircle me . 
14They open their mouths  against me;  
The lion tears and roars.
15aI am poured out like water;  
All my bones are out of joint.  
15bMy heart is like wax;  
It melts within me.  
16aMy strength is dried up like a potsherd,  
And my tongue clings to my mouth,  
16band you set me in the dust of death.
17aFor dogs  have surrounded me ; 
A gathering of evildoers circle me . 
17bThey have dug through my hands and my feet;  
18I can count all my bones . 
While they stare, they look at me.  
19They will divide up my clothes for themselves,  
And they cast lots for my garment.Anointing 221Behold, how good an d how pleasant it is  
    For brothers to dwell together in unity!  
2It is like the good oil  upon the head,  
      Coming down  upon the beard,  
          The beard of Aaron,   
      Coming down  upon the edge of his robes.  
3It is like the dew of Hermon  
      Coming down  upon the mountains of Zion;  
  For there the Lord commanded the blessing,  
       Life unto the age. 
   Psalm 133:1-3 (NASB95)20But as for you, Yahweh,  do not be far away . 
My strength , hasten to my  help . 
21Deliver  my life from the sword,  
My only possession from the power of the dogs . 
22Rescue  me from the mouth of the lion; 
You have answered  me from the horns of the wild ox .
23I will recount your name to my brothers;  
In the midst of the assembly I will praise  you.  
24O you who fear Yahweh, praise  him!  
All you seed of Jacob , honor him!  
And all you  seed of Israel , be in awe of him.
25aFor he did not despise;  
Nor did he detest the affliction of the afflicted one ; 
25bNor did he hide his face from him,  
And when he cried to him, he listened.
26From you comes my my praise in the great assembly;  
I will repay my vows before those who fear him.  
27aThe afflicted ones  shall eat and be satisfied;  
Those who seek Yahweh will praise him.  
27bMay your hearts live forever!
28aThey shall remember and return to Yahweh,  
All the ends of the earth,  
28bAnd they shall worship  before you,  
All the families of the nations;  
29For the kingdom belongs to Yahweh,  
And he rules over the nations.
30aThey ate and they worshiped , 
All the prosperous ones of the land.  
30bThey shall bow down  before him,  
All those who go down to the dust;  
30cEven the one who cannot keep himself alive.  
31aA seed  will serve him;  
31bIt shall be told about the Lord for a generation;  
They will come and proclaim his righteousness to a people yet to be born,  
For he has done (it).Anointing 23The Anointed One in the New Testament
“Christ” is commonly spoken as if it were a last name, but it’s actually a title that 
means “anointed one.”
• English: “anointed” / “to anoint”
• Hebrew: mashiakh / mashakh
• Greek: khristos  / khrio  [translation of Hebrew into Greek] = ‘anointed one/to anoint’
• Greek: messias  [transliteration of Hebrew with Greek letters]  
“Jesus Christ” sounds like a last name in English, but it’s not. There are a handful 
of places in the New Testament where it sounds like a title even in English.
The Suffering-Anointed Jesus
Jesus’ baptism was his “anointing,” not with oil but with water and Spirit.
Mark 1:1-1527Jesus went out, along with his disciples, to the villages of Caesarea 
Philippi; and on the way he questioned his disciples, saying to them, 
“Who do people say that I am?” 28They told him, saying, “John the Baptist; 
and others say Elijah; but others, one of the prophets.” 
29And he continued by questioning them, “But who do you say that I am?” 
Peter answered and said to him, “You are the Christ (ho christos) .”          
       Mark 8:27-29 (NASB95)1The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ 
(Yesous Christos) , the Son of God. 
Mark 1:1 (NASB95)
40One of the two who heard John speak and followed him, was 
Andrew, Simon Peter’s brother. 41He found first his own brother 
Simon and said to him, “We have found the Messiah” (ton 
messian)  (which translated means Christos ).
        John 1:40-41 (NASB95)60The high priest stood up and came forward and 
questioned Jesus, saying, “Do you not answer? What is 
it that these men are testifying against you?” 61But he 
kept silent and did not answer. Again the high priest was 
questioning him, and saying to him, “Are you the Christ , 
the Son of the Blessed One?” 62And Jesus said, “I am; and 
you shall see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of 
Power, and coming with the clouds of heaven.” 
Mark 14:60-62 (NASB95)
1The beginning of the good news about Jesus Messiah [Son of God]
A 2Just as it is written in Isaiah the prophet,
B“Look, I send my messenger  before my face,
who will prepare you way
A'3a voice crying out in the wilderness ,
‘Make ready the way of the Lord,
make straight his paths.’"Anointing 24A4John  was baptizing  in the wilderness ,
and announcing  a baptism  of repentance  for forgiving failures ,
B5and there came out to him
all the Yehudean countryside,
and all the Jerusalemites,
A'and they baptized  by him in the Jordan River ,
confessing their failures .
 6And  John was clothes with the hair of a camel,
  and a leather belt around his waist,
  and he was eating locusts and wild honey,
 7and he announced , saying,
“There comes one stronger than me, behind me,
of whom I am not worthy, while stooping down,
to loosen the strap of his sandals.
8I baptized y’all in water,
but he will baptize  you in the Holy Spirit .
A9And it came about in those days,
Jesus  came from Nazareth of Galilee ,
and he was baptized  in the Jordan  by John ,
B10and immediately, as he rose up from the water ,
he saw the skies being torn open,
and  the spirit  coming down as a dove upon him,
11and a voice was from the skies,
“You are my son,
the beloved one,
in you I delight.”
B'12And immediately, the spirit   cast him out into the wilderness ,
13and he was in the wilderness  forty days,
being tested by the adversary,
And he was with the animals,
And messengers  served him.
A'14After the handing-over of John ,
Jesus  went into Galilee , announcing  the good news  of God,
15and saying that,
“The time is filled-full,
and the  reign of God has come near. Repent  and trust  in the good news !”Anointing 25Notice the merging of key images associated with anointing in the Hebrew Bible.
• Baptism = water
• Spirit = divine empowerment
• Appointment as the image of God = new humanity
The voice from Heaven quotes from three Hebrew Bible texts.
• “You are my son” = Psalm 2:7: “This is my son”
• “The beloved one” = Genesis 22:2: referring to Isaac, about to be sacrificed
• “In you I delight” = Isaiah 42:1: referring to the suffering servant
The unique role of the anointed one is to enter his royal rule by means of  
his suffering. 
In John 1, John’s descriptions of Jesus combine images of water/spirit, Messiah, 
and lamb of God, which points to the future suffering of the anointed one. 
19 This is the testimony of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites to him from Jerusalem to 
ask him, “Who are you?” 20And he confessed and did not deny; and this is what he confessed: 
“I am not the Christ.” 21And so they asked him, “What then? Are you Elijah?” And he said, “I am 
not.” “Are you the Prophet?” And he answered, “No.” 22Then they said to him, “Who are you? 
Tell us, so that we may give an answer to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?” 
23He said, “ I am the voice  of the one calling out in the wilderness, “Make the way of the LORD 
straight,’ as the prophet Isaiah said.”
24And the messengers had been sent from the Pharisees. 25They asked him, and said to him, 
“Why then are you baptizing, if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the Prophet?” 26John 
answered them, saying, “I baptize in water, but among you stands One whom you do not know. 
27It is he who comes after me, of whom I am not worthy even to untie the strap of his sandal.” 
28These things took place in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing people.
29The next day he saw Jesus coming to him, and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God who takes away 
the sin of the world! 30This is he in behalf of whom I said, ‘After me is coming a man who has 
proved to be my superior, because he existed before me.’ 31And I did not recognize him, but so 
that he would be revealed to Israel, I came baptizing in water.” 32And John testified, saying, “ I 
have seen the Spirit descending as a dove out of heaven, and he remained upon him.   33And I 
did not recognize him, but he who sent me to baptize in water said to me, ‘He upon whom you 
see the Spirit descending and remaining upon him, this is the One who baptizes in the Holy 
Spirit.’  34And I myself have seen, and have testified that this is the Son of God.”
35Again the next day John was standing with two of his disciples, 36and he looked at Jesus as he 
walked, and said, “Behold, the Lamb of God!”  37And the two disciples heard him speak, and they 
followed Jesus. 38And Jesus turned and saw them following, and said to them, “What are you 
seeking?” They said to him, “Rabbi, where are you staying?” 39He said to them, “Come, and you 
will see.” So they came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day; it was 
about the tenth hour. 40One of the two who heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, 
Simon Peter’s brother. 41He first found his own brother Simon and said to him, “ We have found 
the Messiah ,” (which translated means Christ).
John 1:19-41 NASBAnointing 26The description of Jesus in John 1 sets the stage for Jesus’ conversation with Nicodemus about 
being “born from above.”
3Jesus answered and said to him, 
       “Truly, truly, I say to you, 
        unless one is  born from above (Heb. anothen ) 
        he cannot see the Kingdom of God.” 
4Nicodemus said to him, 
      “How can a man be born when he is old? 
       He cannot enter a second time into his mother’s womb and be born, can he?” 
5Jesus answered, 
      “Truly, truly, I say to you, 
        unless one is born of water and the Spirit 
        he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. 
        6That which is born of the flesh is flesh, 
        and that which is born of the Spirit is spirit . 
        7Do not be amazed that I said to you, ‘You must be born anothen .’ 
        8The wind blows where it wishes and you hear the sound of it, 
        but do not know where it comes from and where it is going; 
        so is everyone who is born of the Spirit .” 
9Nicodemus said to him, 
       “How can these things be?” 
10Jesus answered and said to him, 
       “Are you the teacher of Israel and do not understand these things?” 
John 3:3-10 (NASB95)  
In Luke 24, we see how this anointed one, the Christ, must suffer to fulfill the prophecies and 
deliver God’s people.
25And he said to them, “O foolish and slow in 
heart to believe in all that the prophets have 
spoken! 26Was it not necessary that the Christ 
suffer these things and enter into his glory?” 
27And beginning from Moses and from all the 
prophets, he interpreted to them the things 
concerning himself in all the scriptures. 
Luke 24:25-27 (LEB)44And he said to them, “These are my words 
that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that 
everything that is written about me in the law 
of Moses and the prophets and psalms must 
be fulfilled.” 45Then he opened their minds to 
understand the scriptures, 46and said to them, 
“Thus it is written that the Christ would suffer and 
would rise from the dead on the third day, 47and 
repentance and the forgiveness of sins would 
be proclaimed in his name to all the nations, 
beginning from Jerusalem.”
Luke 24:44-47 (LEB)Anointing 27Sharing in Jesus' Anointing
As rebellious humans, we degrade and distort the image of the divine by either exalting people 
as god-like beings or treating them as less than human, like animals. And we distort the rule of 
God by abusing power over others
 God responds to this human rebellion with a plan to restore the life and blessings of the garden 
to all people. He begins by selecting people, out from among the many, and marking them as a 
vehicle for his Eden blessing. And in the story of the Bible, one of the ways this happened was 
through anointing. 
In the New Testament, we are introduced to the anointed one from the line of David, the 
Messiah, Jesus Christ, who was anointed with water and Spirit. And in Luke 4, Jesus quotes from 
Isaiah 61, calling himself the “Spirit-anointed” one, referring to his baptism. 
Soaked with the life and power of God, Jesus began releasing the blessings of Eden out into 
people’s lives through healings, feasts, and celebration meals and inviting marginalized people 
into God’s new Kingdom world.
Jesus’ anointing wasn’t just an oil that soaked his skin. His anointing filled him with the presence 
and love of God, which is stronger than evil and death. And so the power of his anointing 
reversed the course of death itself, transforming his body into a new kind of human form.
After his resurrection, Jesus gathered his followers and said that his anointing was going to 
become theirs—they too were going to be anointed by the Spirit (Luke 24:26-29). And this 
anointing of the Spirit happened weeks later at Pentecost (Acts 2).
 
 