Generosity 
Study Notes
Introduction 
If you are a Christian, you probably know the value of being a generous person. But what 
does generosity really look like? Why is it so important to God? This is what our theme video 
on generosity is all about. These notes go a level deeper than we can cover in a five-minute 
video. In the following pages, you’ll be introduced to key concepts and passages that will 
enable you to gain a better understanding of the theme of generosity throughout the Bible.
Contents
Jesus’ Upside-Down View of the World  2
The Genesis Narratives  3
The Story of Israel  7
The Story of the New Testament  10
What Have We Learned About Generosity?  13Generosity 2Jesus’ Upside-Down View of the World
Jesus grew up in a world under military occupation, with people losing their land and families to 
debt and poverty. Knowing his firsthand experience of poverty, ponder one of his teachings.
*Most Scripture quotations are from the New American Standard Bible (NASB) with changes and emphasis added for understanding. 
Jesus looks at birds and flowers and grass and sees signs of God’s generosity and overabundant love. These words 
may sound somewhat irresponsible to a Type A, hard-working person. What kind of tradition forms a person to 
speak like this? (You can’t just say, “Well, he’s Jesus!”) Jesus is articulating a way of seeing the world that is rooted 
in Hebrew Scripture and its depiction of God’s generosity. Look at how this psalmist reflects the same worldview.
Freedom from anxiety is rooted in a conception of the universe found in the first pages of Genesis. This 
truth shaped the way Hebrew poets like the one behind Psalm 104 viewed the world. Creation is presented 
as a safe place where humanity is welcomed by a generous host. The overabundance seen in nature 
comes from a Creator who shows that same generosity toward us, and this mindset frees us from the 
fear of releasing resources to others. This is the upside-down way Jesus looked at the world. Let’s take a 
closer look at these first chapters of the Hebrew Scriptures that Jesus and the psalmist knew so well. And he said to his disciples, “For this reason I tell you, don’t be 
anxious about your life, what you will eat; and don’t be anxious about 
your body, what clothes you put on. For life is more than food, and 
the body more than clothing. Ponder the ravens, for they don’t sow 
seed or reap a harvest; they have no storerooms or barns, and yet 
God feeds them; how much more valuable you are than the birds! 
And which of you by worrying can add an hour to his life’s span? 
And if you cannot do even a very little thing, why do you worry about 
other matters? Ponder the lilies, how they grow: they don’t toil or 
spin clothes; but I tell you, not even Solomon in all his glory clothed 
himself like one of these. But if God so clothes the grass in the field, 
which is here today and tomorrow is thrown into the furnace, how much more will he clothe you? You who trust God so little! And do 
not seek what you will eat and what you will drink, and don’t foster 
your anxiety. For all these things the nations of the world eagerly 
seek; and your Father knows that you need these things. But seek His 
kingdom, and these things will be granted  to you. Do not be afraid, 
little flock, for your Father has chosen gladly to give  you the kingdom.
Sell your possessions and give to the poor; make yourselves 
money belts which do not wear out, an unfailing treasure in 
heaven, where no thief comes near nor moth destroys. For 
where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Luke 12:22-34
He sends forth springs in the valleys;  
They flow between the mountains;  
They give drink to every beast of the field;  
The wild donkeys quench their thirst.  
Beside them the birds of the heavens dwell;  
They lift up their voices among the branches.  
He waters the mountains from his upper chambers;  
The earth is satisfied with the fruit of his works.
He causes the grass to grow for the cattle,  
And vegetation for the labor of man,  
So that he may bring forth food from the earth,  
And wine which makes man’s heart glad,  
So that he may make his face glisten with oil,    
And food which sustains man’s heart.  
The trees of the Lord drink their fill,  
The cedars of Lebanon which he planted,  
Where the birds build their nests,  
And the stork, whose home is the fir trees.O Lord, how many are your works!  
In wisdom you have made them all;  
The earth is full of your possessions.    
There is the sea, great and broad,  
In which are swarms without number,  
Animals both small and great.  
There the ships move along,  
And Leviathan, which you have formed to sport in it.  
They all wait for you  
To give them their food in due season.  
You give to them, they gather it up;  
You open your hand, they are satisfied with good.
Psalm 104:10-17, 24-28Generosity 3The Genesis Narratives: Meeting the Generous Host of Creation
Genesis chapters 1 and 2 present two complementary creation accounts that confirm the 
same truth. Creation is an expression of the generous, creative love of God. First, God 
brings order out of chaos and blesses humanity (Genesis 1). In the following account, God 
creates a garden out of a wasteland and gives it as a gift to humanity (Genesis 2). 
Later biblical poets reflect on this creation event as an expression of divine love.
Creation as a gift to humanity contrasts with the alternative conceptions of creation in the ancient 
Near East. Let’s take a look at one prominent story called the Atrahasis Epic (Akkadian for “extremely 
wise”). This story was discovered on Akkadian tables that date back to the 17th century B.C. 
The Story of Atrahasis
The Atrahasis Epic presents multiple tiers to the divine order. Enlil, the chief deity of the land, along 
with Anu (sky-ruler) and Enki (god of fresh water) are at the top of the hierarchy. The Annunaki, upper 
class deities, are one level down. Lastly, the Igigi are the lower-class deities, who serve the Annunaki 
in menial labor. The Igigi become tired of serving the upper tiers, and they stage a massive walkout, 
grumbling over their labor in the river deltas. They go to Enlil and protest. The Annunaki send out 
negotiators who arrange for another creature be made to serve the Annunaki: humanity!
Chief Deities: Enlil, Anu, Enki
Upper Class Deities: Annunaki
Lower Class Deities: Igigi
Humanity
The new creatures need to be closer to the gods than animals, so a junior deity (Geshtu) is 
sacrificially killed, and his blood is mixed with clay to produce the humans. Humans will now 
serve the Annunaki in place of the Igigi. But there was a catch in their master plan.And God blessed them and said, “Be fruitful and multiply, 
subdue the land, and rule over the fish of the sea and over the 
birds of the sky and over the living things upon the land.”
Genesis 1:28  And Yahweh God took the human and placed him in 
the garden of Eden to work it and to care for it.
Genesis 2:15
Your covenant love, O Lord, extends to the heavens,  
Your faithfulness reaches to the skies.  
Your righteousness is like the mountains of God (lit. “El”);  
Your justice is a great deep.  
O Lord, you deliver (lit. “save”) human and beast.  
How precious is your covenant love, O God!  
And the sons of humanity take refuge in the shadow of your wings.  
They drink their fill of the abundance of your house;  
And you give them to drink of the river of your delights (lit. “Edens”).  
For with you is the fountain of life;  
In your light we see light.
Psalm 36:5-9Generosity 4The gods are immediately annoyed by the noise, mess, and overpopulation of humanity. Therefore, they send 
a flood to annihilate them. But Enki goes to warn one of the humans, Atrahasis, who builds a great boat for his 
family and animals. Author Joshua Berman reflects on the contrast between this story and the biblical account.
Humanity as God’s Chief Stewards
As you can see, the Atrahasis Epic stands in complete contrast to the biblical portrait. In Genesis 1-2, creation is put 
forth as a gift for the animals and for humanity. Far from slaves, humans are created to rule in partnership with God.
God designed humanity to be the chief stewards of creation. However, God is the Creator and 
uncontested owner of all creation. Biblical authors throughout Scripture reflect this truth.The tale is a virtual celebration of social hierarchy. From the beginning 
of time, the gods have already been divided along social lines. The 
rebellion of the lower gods simply serves as an occasion to bring 
humans onto the scene to occupy the lowest rung on the ladder. The 
purpose of humankind is to serve as a toiling servant of the gods, 
carrying out the most menial, backbreaking tasks on their behalf. 
Joshua Berman, Created Equal: How the Bible 
Broke with Ancient Political Thought , 21
God created humanity in his image, in the image of God he created 
him; male and female he created them. God blessed them; and God 
said to them, “Be fruitful and multiply, and fill the land, and subdue 
it; and rule over the fish of the sea and over the birds of the sky and 
over every living thing that moves on the earth.” Then God said, 
“Behold, I have given you  every plant yielding seed that is on the 
face of all the land, and every tree which has fruit yielding seed; it 
shall be food for you; and I have given  to every beast of the earth 
and to every bird of the sky and to everything that moves on the 
earth which has life, every green plant for food”; and it was so.
Genesis 1:27-30 Then Yahweh God took the human and put him in 
the garden of Eden to work it and to keep it.
Genesis 2:15 
The earth is the Lord’s, and all it contains,  
The world, and those who dwell in it.  
For He has founded it upon the seas  
And established it upon the rivers.
Psalm 24:1-2  
The skies are yours; the land also is yours;  
the world and all that is in it, you have founded them.  
The north and the south, you have created them;
Psalm 89:11-12    
Know that Yahweh, he is God!  
It is he who made us, and we belong to him.
Psalm 100:3The God who made the world and all things in it, since he is Lord 
of heaven and earth, does not dwell in temples made with hands; 
nor is he served by human hands, as though he needed anything, 
since he himself gives to all people life and breath and all things;
Acts 17:24-25
For from him and through him and to him are all 
things. To him be glory forever. Amen.
Romans 11:36  Generosity 5This is the beautiful picture of the world that we find in the Bible. Creation is an expression 
of God’s generous love. He is the host, and humans are his guests in a world of opportunity 
and abundance. We are called to keep the party going and to spread his goodness.
But that’s not the way most people experience the world. Rather, we find a world 
marked by scarcity and struggle, not abundance. What went wrong?
The Root of a Scarcity Mindset
The biblical portrait of evil begins with an act of desiring and taking what is not rightfully ours to take. You can 
find the full story in Genesis chapter 3, but let’s take a look at a few verses that demonstrate this point. 
• “You shall not eat from any tree of the garden”  (Gen. 3:1). The scene opens 
with a serpent subtly undermining God’s generosity.
• “You will not die. For God knows that in the day you eat from it, your eyes will be opened 
and you will be like elohim, knowing good and evil”  (Gen. 3:4-5). The serpent portrays 
God as holding out on humanity, withholding knowledge and good things.
• “When the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree 
was desirable  for making wise, she took from its fruit and ate; and she gave  also to her husband with her, and 
he ate”  (Gen. 3:6). The word for “ desirable ” (Hebrew: nekhmad ) refers to an object of covetous desire.
God’s Short-Term Response
God’s short-term response to covetousness is to give people over to their corrupted desires. The opening 
pages of Genesis sit within the larger literary unit of Genesis chapters 1-11. The following chapters provide a 
series of vignettes to demonstrate the effects of evil worked out through covetous desire in the world.  
• Genesis 4:  Cain’s jealous anger at his brother compels him to take  life instead of give . This is why murder is 
such a heinous crime in the Old Testament. To “take” a life is to act as if it is mine to take, rather than recognizing 
my role as a human is to “give” life and participate in its flourishing. An additional irony occurs in this passage. 
Cain is called a “worker of the ground” (Gen. 4:2) but denies his role as a “keeper of your brother” (Gen. 
4:9). This is a direct rebellion against the call of humanity in Genesis 2:15 to “work and keep” the garden. 
• Genesis 6:  The sons of elohim, “ saw that the daughters of men were beautifu l (lit. good); 
and they took  wives for themselves, whomever they chose ” (Genesis 6:2).
• Genesis 11 : The people of Babylon declare, “Let us build  for ourselves  a city and a tower, 
and it’s head will be in the skies, and we will make a name for ourselves ” (Gen. 11:4).Generosity 6God’s Long-Term Response
At the end of this rather depressing literary unit, the author reveals God’s long-term response to what was lost 
in Genesis 3. God’s plan is to offer a new gift—the new human Jesus who opens the way to a new creation. God 
wants humans to experience his generosity, so he starts with one family—the family of Abraham—and promises to 
give them the abundance he wants for everyone else. The most tangible part of this gift is the promised Land.
As the story of Abraham continues, we see something has shifted in his perspective 
because of God’s generosity. Lot—Abraham’s nephew—takes the good Eden-land 
for himself. In contrast, Abraham allows God to “give” him the land. 
So what’s the point of these early Genesis narratives? They show us several 
key truths that drive the rest of the biblical narrative. 
• God is the generous Creator who consistently gives what people don’t deserve.
• Creation is fundamentally corrupted when people desire what isn’t theirs and 
take it, instead of imitating the Creator’s generous sharing strategy.
• God’s response is to continue giving until humans begin to give like God.Now the Lord said to Abram,  
“Go forth from your country,  
And from your family  
And from your father’s house,  
To the land which I will show you;  
And I will make you a great nation,  
And I will bless you,  
And make your name great;  And you shall be a blessing;  
And I will bless those who bless you,  
And the one who treats you as cursed, I will curse.  
And in you all the families of the earth will be blessed.”  
“To your seed  I will give this land .” So he built an 
altar there to Yahweh who appeared to him.
Genesis 12:1-3, 7
So Abram said to Lot, “Please let there be no strife between you 
and me, nor between my herdsmen and your herdsmen, for we 
are brothers. Is not the whole land before you? Please separate 
from me; if to the left, then I will go to the right; or if to the right, 
then I will go to the left.” Lot lifted up his eyes and saw  all the 
valley of the Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere like the 
garden of Yahweh , like the land of Egypt as you go to Zoar (this 
was before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah). So Lot 
chose for himself all the valley of the Jordan, and Lot journeyed 
eastward.  Thus they separated from each other. Abram settled 
in the land of Canaan, while Lot settled in the cities of the valley, 
and moved his tents as far as Sodom. (Now the men of Sodom 
were wicked exceedingly and sinners against Yahweh.)Yahweh said to Abram, after Lot had separated from him, “Now lift 
up your eyes and look from the place where you are, northward 
and southward and eastward and westward; for all the land 
which you see,  I will give it to you  and to your descendants 
forever. I will make your descendants as the dust of the earth, 
so that if anyone can number the dust of the earth, then your 
descendants can also be numbered. Arise, walk about the land 
through its length and breadth; for I will give it to you .”
Genesis 13:8-17Generosity 7The Story of Israel: God’s Generosity in Light of a Scarcity Mindset
Several hundred years later, the family of Abraham became the nation of Israel. 
Unfortunately, they became enslaved in another land—Egypt. Yet God had not 
forgotten his promise to gift these people their own land. He brought them up 
out of Egypt and communicated several ideas surrounding this gift. 
Israel’s test in the land is to attribute all life and existence to God’s generous gift. 
In the following passage, they are warned not to forget the gift of the land.
The gift of the land places an obligation upon Israel. The gift is unconditioned  (unmerited), 
but not unconditional (non-reciprocal). It is not given to Israel based on an evaluation of 
their worthiness, but it is given with a clear expectation of obligated response. You all shall therefore keep every commandment which I am 
commanding you today, so that you may be strong and go in 
and possess the land ... so that you may prolong your days on 
the land which the Lord swore to your fathers to give to them  
and to their descendants, a land flowing with milk and honey. 
For the land, into which you are entering to possess it, is not like 
the land of Egypt from which you came, where you used to sow 
your seed and water it with your foot like a vegetable garden. But 
the land into which you are about to cross to possess it, a land of 
hills and valleys, drinks water from the rain of heaven, a land for which the Lord your God cares; the eyes of the Lord your God are 
always on it, from the beginning even to the end of the year.
It shall come about, if you listen obediently to my commandments 
which I am commanding you today, to love the Lord your God and 
to serve him with all your heart and all your soul, that he will give 
the rain for your land in its season, the early and late rain, that 
you may gather in your grain and your new wine and your oil.
Deuteronomy 11:8-14
Therefore, you shall keep the commandments of the Lord your God, 
to walk in his ways and to fear him. For the Lord your God is bringing 
you into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and 
springs, flowing forth in valleys and hills; a land of wheat and barley, 
of vines and fig trees and pomegranates, a land of olive oil and honey; 
a land where you will eat food without scarcity, in which you will not 
lack anything ... When you have eaten and are satisfied, you shall 
bless the Lord your God for the good land which he has given you.  
Beware that you do not forget the Lord your God by not keeping 
his commandments and his ordinances and his statutes which I am 
commanding you today; otherwise, when you have eaten and are 
satisfied, and have built good houses and lived in them, and when 
your herds and your flocks multiply, and your silver and gold multiply, 
and all that you have multiplies, then your heart will become proud 
and you will forget the Lord your God who brought you out from the 
land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery ... Otherwise, you may say 
in your heart, “My power and the strength of my hand produced for 
me this wealth.” But you shall remember the Lord your God, for it is 
He who is giving you power to make wealth,  that he may confirm 
his covenant which he swore to your fathers, as it is this day.
Deuteronomy 8:6-16The land, moreover, shall not be sold permanently, for the land 
is mine; for you are but aliens and sojourners with me.
Leviticus 25:23Generosity 8Although Israel was going to be a political entity, their economy was not going to look like 
the surrounding nations. They were to have an “Exodus-style” economic system. 
The whole point of Israel and the land was to demonstrate the abundance God desired for the whole world. God 
would provide what they needed. In response, they would need to trust and mirror God’s generosity. How did this go?At the end of every seven years you shall grant a remission of debts. 
This is the manner of remission: every creditor shall release what 
he has loaned to his neighbor; he shall not exact it of his neighbor 
and his brother, because the Lord’s remission has been proclaimed. 
From a foreigner you may exact it, but your hand shall release 
whatever of yours is with your brother. However, there will be no 
poor among you, since the Lord will surely bless you in the land 
which the Lord your God is giving you as an inheritance to possess, 
if only you listen obediently to the voice of the Lord your God, to 
observe carefully all this commandment which I am commanding 
you today. For the Lord your God will bless you as he has promised 
you, and you will lend to many nations, but you will not borrow; and 
you will rule over many nations, but they will not rule over you.
If there is a poor man with you, one of your brothers, in any of 
your towns in your land which the Lord your God is giving you, 
you shall not harden your heart, nor close your hand from your 
poor brother; but you shall freely open your hand to him,  and 
shall generously lend  him sufficient for his need in whatever he 
lacks. Beware that there is no wicked thought in your heart, saying, 
“The seventh year, the year of remission, is near,” and your eye is 
hostile toward your poor brother, and you give him nothing ; then 
he may cry to the Lord against you, and it will be a sin in you. You 
shall generously give to him,  and your heart shall not be grieved 
when you give to him, because for this thing the Lord your God 
will bless you in all your work and in all your undertakings.
Deuteronomy 15:1-10When you are harvesting in your field and you overlook a sheaf, 
do not go back to get it. Leave it for the immigrant, the fatherless 
and the widow, so that the Lord your God may bless you in all the 
work of your hands. When you beat the olives from your trees, do 
not go over the branches a second time. Leave what remains for 
the immigrant, the fatherless and the widow. When you harvest the 
grapes in your vineyard, do not go over the vines again. Leave what 
remains for the foreigner, the fatherless and the widow. Remember 
that you were slaves in Egypt. That is why I command you to do this.
Deuteronomy 24:19-22
A key theological claim at work in these laws is that of God’s identity 
as the liberator of slaves. He forms a people out of those who were 
deemed to be people of no standing at all by the political and 
economic leaders who oppressed them. The egalitarian streak within 
peneteuchal law codes accords with the portrayal of the Exodus 
as the prime experience of Israel’s self-understanding. Indeed, no 
Israelite can lay claim to any greater status than another, because 
all emanate from the Exodus—a common seminal, liberating, and 
equalizing event … This notion of God’s sovereignty as creator 
and liberator animated the biblical laws aimed at preventing 
Israelites from descending into the cycle of poverty and debt.
Berman, Created Equal: How the Bible Broke 
with Ancient Political Thought , 88.Generosity 9The Forgotten Gift
The story of Israel continues into a downward spiral. Israel takes God’s gifts and attributes them to 
idol-gods. As a result, God sends them out of the land and back to the wilderness. The prophets 
reflect on this tragic event yet still hold on to hope in God’s long-term plan. Note the echoes 
of Genesis 1 and the Sinai covenant promise of the land in the following passages. 
Israel entered the land of abundance and promptly forgot who gave it to them. They act like it’s 
all theirs and like there’s not enough, which leads to war and to Israel’s self-destruction. The Old 
Testament ends without the promises of the restored gift fulfilled. Yet it seems the hope for eternal 
life is life back in the land as a new Eden. How will God’s long-term plan come to fruition? For [Israel’s] mother has played the harlot;  
She who conceived them has acted shamefully.  
For she said, “I will go after my lovers,  
Who give me my  bread and my water,  
My wool and my flax, my oil and my drink. ”  
Therefore, behold, I will hedge up her way with thorns,  
And I will build a wall against her so that she cannot find her paths.  
She will pursue her lovers, but she will not overtake them;  
And she will seek them, but will not find them …
For she does not know that it was I who gave her the grain, the new 
wine and the oil,  
And lavished on her silver and gold,  
Which they used for Baal (or, “made into a Baal”)  
Therefore, I will take back My grain at harvest time  
And my new wine in its season.  
I will also take away my wool and my flax …
I will visit upon her the days of the Baals  
When she used to offer sacrifices to them  
And adorn herself with her earrings and jewelry,  
And follow her lovers, so that she forgot me, declares the Lord.  
Therefore, behold, I will allure her,  
Bring her into the wilderness And speak to her heart.  
Then I will give her  her vineyards from there,  
And the valley of Achor as a door of hope.  
And she will sing there as in the days of her youth,  
As in the day when she came up from the land of Egypt …
In that day I will also make a covenant for them  
With the beasts of the field,  
The birds of the sky  
And the creeping things of the ground.  
And I will break the bow, the sword and war from the land, 
And will make them lie down in safety.  
It will come about in that day that I will respond, declares the Lord.  
I will respond to the heavens, and they will respond to the earth,  
And the earth will respond to the grain, to 
the new wine and to the oil ...
Hosea 2:5-22For I will take you from the nations, gather you from all the lands 
and bring you into your own land. Then I will sprinkle clean water on 
you, and you will be clean; I will cleanse you from all your filthiness 
and from all your idols. Moreover, I will give to you  a new heart and 
put a new spirit within you; and I will remove the heart of stone from 
your flesh and give you a heart of flesh. I will give my Spirit  within 
you and cause you to walk in my statutes, and you will be careful 
to observe my ordinances. You will live in the land that I gave to 
your forefathers; so you will be my people, and I will be your God. 
Moreover, I will save you from all your uncleanness; and I will call for 
the grain and multiply it, and I will not bring a famine on you. I will 
multiply the fruit of the tree and the produce of the field, so that you 
will not receive again the disgrace of famine among the nations.
Thus says the Lord God, “On the day that I cleanse you from 
all your iniquities, I will cause the cities to be inhabited, and 
the waste places will be rebuilt … They will say, ‘This desolate 
land has become like the garden of Eden;  and the waste, 
desolate and ruined cities are fortified and inhabited.’”
Ezekiel 36:24-35Generosity 10The Story of the New Testament: Culmination of God’s Generosity
We open up the pages of the New Testament and God has not given up. God gives 
humanity the ultimate gift—himself. Jesus lives with the conviction that there is enough 
and that our generous host can be trusted. The fundamental depiction of God in the New 
Testament is of a generous gift-giver whose generosity should effect a transformation 
of our lives. Let’s look at some key passages that expand on this concept.
In his most famous teaching—the Sermon on the Mount—Jesus reflects the 
generosity of God toward all humanity. This mindset of abundance allowed 
him to live sacrificially and generously, even toward his enemies.
The apostle John tells the story of Jesus through generosity language. 
The apostle Paul pushes followers of Jesus to respond to his radical generosity. The love of God 
shown through Jesus is a love that can turn death into life and scarcity back into abundance. 
James combines the portrayal of God as Creator (Genesis 1) with Jesus’ own 
teaching about God as a generous father (Luke 12:22-34). You have heard that it was said, “You shall love your neighbor 
and hate your enemy.” But I say to you, love your enemies and 
pray for those who persecute you, so that you may be sons of 
your Father who is in heaven; for he causes his sun to rise on 
the evil and the good, and sends rain on the righteous and the 
unrighteous.  For if you love those who love you, what reward 
do you have? Do not even the tax collectors do the same? If 
you greet only your brothers, what more are you doing than 
others? Do not even the Gentiles do the same? Therefore you 
are to be complete, as your heavenly Father is complete.”
Matthew 5:43-48
God so loved the world, that he gave  his 
one and only Son, so that whoever believes 
in him would not perish but have eternal life.
John 3:16See how great a love the Father has 
given  on us, that we would be called 
children of God; and that is what we are. 
1 John 3:1   And the testimony is this, that 
God has given  us eternal life, 
and this life is in his Son.
1 John 5:11
What then shall we say to these things? If God is for us, who is 
against us? He who did not spare his own Son, but gave  him over 
for us all, how will he not also with him freely gift us all things?
Romans 8:31-32
Every good thing given  and every perfect gift is from 
above, coming down from the Father of lights, with 
whom there is no variation or shifting shadow.
James 1:17 Generosity 11Creation as Outpouring of God’s Love
The New Testament authors wanted to show that God’s generosity in Christ was nothing new. From the 
beginning, creation itself is the generous gift that is the outflow of the love between the Father and Son. 
Exploring Grace as Gift
The gift of life in creation was restored through the gift of God’s love and life in Jesus. Jesus 
opened up a whole new way to be human as we wait for the promised new creation. These 
concepts are developed at length in Paul’s writings through two important Greek words.
• Charis  (noun: “grace, gift”)
• Charizomai  (verb: “to give a gift, forgive”)
Paul makes clear God’s generous action toward humanity in the life, death, 
and resurrection of Jesus and in the gift of the Spirit. 
The gift/grace given should energize a response from God’s people. This includes 
sharing the gift and being generous in actions toward each other. “God, who needs nothing, loves into existence wholly superfluous 
creatures in order that he may love and perfect them.” 
C.S. Lewis, The Four Loves , 127.
This is eternal life, that they may know you, the only true God, 
and Jesus Christ whom you have sent. I glorified you on the 
earth, having accomplished the work which you have given 
me to do. Now, Father, glorify me together with yourself, with 
the glory which I had with you before the world was.
The glory which you have given me I have given to them, that 
they may be one, just as we are one;  I in them and you in me,  
that they may be completed in unity, so that the world may know 
that you sent me, and loved them, even as you have loved me. 
Father, I desire that they also, whom you have given me, be with 
me where I am, so that they may see my glory which you have 
given me, for you loved me before the foundation of the world .
John 17:3-5, 22-24In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, 
and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God. 
All things came into being through him, and apart from him 
nothing came into being that has come into being.
John 1:1-3
But God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love with which 
he loved us, even when we were dead in our transgressions, 
made us alive together with Christ (by grace  you have been 
saved), and raised us up with him, and seated us with him in 
the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, so that in the ages to come 
he might show the surpassing riches of his grace in kindness 
toward us in Christ Jesus. For by grace  you have been saved 
through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the  gift of God;
Ephesians 2:4-8
To me, the very least of all saints, this grace was given, to 
preach to the Gentiles the unfathomable riches of Christ.
Ephesians 3:8Be kind to one another, tender-hearted, forgiving  (lit. gifting) each 
other, just as God in Christ also has forgiven (lit. gifted) you.
 Ephesians 4:32Generosity 12The Six Nuances of Grace
Think of different types of gifts you have received—for example, a birthday gift or a thank you card. Maybe you 
have received a gift that came with some sort of obligation. The meaning of gifts can often be nuanced and 
change based on the context. So when Paul talks about grace as a gift, what kind of gift is he talking about?
In Paul’s writings, grace has six distinct nuances of meaning (John Barclay, Paul and the Gift ). This 
multifaceted definition of grace/gift allows us to read Paul’s words with deeper understanding.
1. Superabundance:  This is about the scale of the gift—the more excessive and 
more all-encompassing the gift, the more perfect it appears.
2. Singularity  (benevolent motivation): This is about the spirit in which the gift is given, 
so that the giver’s sole and exclusive motivation is goodness and generosity.
3. Priority:  This is about the timing of the gift, which is made perfect by being prior to any demand 
or request of the recipient; it is spontaneous and not obliged by the previous gift.
4. Incongruity:  This is about the worthiness of the recipient; the most perfect gifts 
are given indiscriminately without regard for the worth of the receiver.
5. Efficacy:  This is about the purpose of the gift; the perfect gift will fully achieve what it’s designed to do. 
6. Non-Circularity:  This is about the expectation of return for a gift given; almost 
all gift giving in human history begins a series of reciprocal giving.
With this fuller definition of grace, let’s ponder a passage from Paul. Although he 
emphasizes aspects of God’s “gift” in Jesus and the Spirit in many of his letters, 2 
Corinthians 8-9 provides a particularly powerful explanation of grace at work. 
Paul was convinced of the power of God’s grace, turning death into life and scarcity back 
into abundance. He challenged his readers to live lives transformed by this truth.Now, brethren, we wish to make known to you the grace  of God 
which has been  given  in the churches of Macedonia, that in a great 
ordeal of affliction their abundance of joy and their deep poverty 
overflowed in the wealth of their liberality. For I testify that according 
to their ability, and beyond their ability, they gave  of their own 
accord, begging us with much urging for the grace of participation 
(Greek: koinonia) in the service of the saints, and this, not as we had 
expected, but they first  gave  themselves to the Lord and to us by 
the will of God. So we urged Titus that as he had previously made 
a beginning, so he would also complete in you this grace  as well. 
But just as you abound in everything, in faith and utterance and 
knowledge and in all earnestness and in the love we inspired in 
you, see that you abound in this grace also. I am not speaking this 
as a command, but as proving through the earnestness of others 
the sincerity of your love also. For you know the grace of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, that though He was rich, yet for your sake He became 
poor, so that you through His poverty might become rich.  I give 
my opinion in this matter, for this is to your advantage, who were 
the first to begin a year ago not only to do this, but also to desire 
to do it. But now finish doing it also, so that just as there was the 
readiness to desire it, so there may be also the completion of it by 
your ability. For if the readiness is present, it is acceptable according 
to what a person has, not according to what he does not have.
2 Corinthians 8:1-12And God is able to make all grace  abound to you, so that 
always having all sufficiency in everything, you may have 
an abundance for every good deed; as it is written,
“He scattered abroad, he gave to the poor, 
His righteousness endures forever.”
Now he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food will 
supply and multiply your seed for sowing and increase the harvest 
of your righteousness; you will be enriched in everything for all 
liberality, which through us is producing thanksgiving to God. For 
the ministry of this service is not only fully supplying the needs of the 
saints, but is also overflowing through many thanksgivings to God. 
Because of the proof given by this ministry, they will glorify God for 
your obedience to your confession of the gospel of Christ and for 
the liberality of your contribution to them and to all, while they also, 
by prayer on your behalf, yearn for you because of the surpassing 
grace  of God in you. Thanks be to God for his indescribable grace !
2 Corinthians 9:8-14Generosity 13What Have We Learned About Generosity?
Creation is an expression of the generous, creative love of God. As humans, we are called 
to keep the party going and spread his goodness. However, we find ourselves in a world of 
scarcity and struggle. The biblical portrait of evil began with an act of desire for what is not 
rightly ours and taking it for ourselves. In the story of the Old Testament, God continually 
combats this scarcity mindset through his generosity and love toward humanity. 
The story culminates in Jesus. The host himself comes to join the spoiled party. Jesus’ 
death was the ultimate expression of God’s love. It’s a love that can turn death into life and 
scarcity back into abundance. Jesus followers now have the opportunity and responsibility 
to live like the real party has begun! One of the most important ways that we can experience 
the abundance of God’s new creation is sharing with others and believing that there is 
enough. This is the purest expression of our trust that God is the generous host. 
Sources
Barclay, John M. G. Paul and the Gift. William B Eerdmans Publishing, 2017.
Berman, Joshua A. Created Equal: How the Bible Broke with Ancient Political Thought. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Johnson, Luke Timothy. Sharing Possessions: Mandate and Symbol of Faith. London: SCM Press, 1986.
Lewis, C. S. The Four Loves. S.l.: Fontana Books, 1973.
Powell, Mark Allan. Giving to God: The Bible’s Good News about Living a Generous Life. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Pub., 2006.