Public Reading in the Old Testament
The first mention in Scripture of writing the Bible is right after 
Israel defeats the Amalekites. “Then the Lord said to Moses, 
‘write this on a scroll as something to be remembered…’” 
This story, written down and later recited, served to remind 
the Israelites of the faithfulness of God that rescued them 
again and again.
The first time we see Israel gathered as a group to meet 
before God and hear a divine word is in Exodus 19-24 at the 
foot of Mount Sinai. Israel had just experienced profound 
salvation in their liberation from slavery in Egypt. Now they are 
standing together at the foot of Mount Sinai where God will 
appear in person and invite them into a covenant relationship. 
Moses met with God and wrote down all of the terms of the 
covenant. He then reads them aloud to the people, and the 
people respond by saying, “everything the Lord has said, we 
will do.” 
It’s in this hearing of their covenant relationship with God 
that their identity is remade. They have the opportunity to 
transform from slaves into priests–God’s very representatives 
among the nations.
Although the whole earth is mine, you will be for me a kingdom 
of priests and a holy nation. These are the words you [Moses] are 
to speak to the Israelites. 
The Public Reading 
of Scripture
__________________________________________________
STUDY NOTES  
Learn more and 
watch our videos at 
thebibleproject.com1CONTENTS
1. Public Reading in the Old Testament
2. Reciting Scripture in Israel’s Education
3. Public Reading of Scripture in Jewish Tradition
EXODUS 19:5-6EXODUS 24:3EXODUS 17:14THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 2  THE PUBLIC READING OF SCRIPTUREIn these initial instances of Scripture written and read aloud, 
we find insight into the very purpose of Scripture itself. Not 
only does publicly reading the Scriptures serve to retell the 
story of what God did in saving his children, it also invites 
them into an intimate covenant relationship and a whole new 
way of life! When people gather together to listen, they are 
empowered to renew their commitment to the story while 
simultaneously finding, remembering, and reaffirming their 
own identity and way of life. This process and result is known 
as identity formation.
Reciting Scripture in Israel’s Education
Read Deuteronomy 4:5-14 and 31:9-13. Moses had written 
a “proto-Torah” and committed it to the priests who were 
to read “this Torah” aloud every seven years at the feast of 
booths. The importance of reciting Scripture was crucial 
in terms of Israel’s common education, starting with their 
children. “…do not forget the things your eyes have seen or let 
them slip from your heart as long as you live. Teach them to 
your children and to their children after them.” 
In his commentary on Deuteronomy, Jeffrey Tigay writes:
The public reading of the Teaching is part of the “democrat -
ic” character of biblical religion, which addresses its teachings 
and demands to all its adherents, with few distinctions between 
priests and laity, and calls for universal education of the citizenry 
in law and religion. The entire people, and not only a spiritual, 
intellectual, or clerical elite, are God’s children and consecrated 
to Him.
After Israel enters the promised land, Scripture says: 
Joshua read all the words of the law—the blessings and the curs -
es—just as it is written in the Book of the Law. There was not a 
word of all that Moses had commanded that Joshua did not read 
to the whole assembly of Israel, including the women and chil -
dren, and the foreigners who lived among them.
 
The book of Judges describes how the entire generation that 
followed the death of Joshua forgot what God had done 
for them. Centuries later in 2 Kings, Josiah rediscovers the 
Scriptures and calls together a public reading once again. 
In both cases we see that identity formation was the main 
purpose of the gathering. With Joshua, it was to re-establish 
their identity in a brand new setting. With Josiah, the reading 
called them to renew their covenant identity after a period of 
apostasy. Unfortunately Israel forgot their story once again, 
and they end up in exile.2 
 THE JPS TORAH 
COMMENTARY: 
DEUTERONOMY
JEFFREY TIGAYDEUTERONOMY 4:9
JOSHUA 8:34-35
JUDGES 2:10
2 KINGS 23:1-3THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 3  THE PUBLIC READING OF SCRIPTURE
After Israel returns from exile in Babylon, Ezra and Nehemiah 
team up to put on a public reading of Scripture. They 
construct a kind of elevated “reading station” for the people to 
gather around while the Levites do the reading.
They read from the Book of the Law of God, making it clear and 
giving the meaning so that the people understood what was be -
ing read. 
This is the first example of an expository teaching before God’s 
people. They gather not only to renew their commitment and 
hear the divine word read aloud, but also to have it explained 
to them. 
Public Reading of Scripture in Jewish Tradition
In the Middle Ages, Jewish communities in Palestine created 
a three and a half year-long system for reading through the 
Torah, combining the readings with selections drawn from the 
Prophets and Ketuvim. Because readings were shorter, this 
aided in the development of the homily, i.e. short educational 
messages of exhortation based on texts that were read aloud.
As Jeffrey Tigay observes, publicly reading Scripture wielded 
power to shape Jewish identity.
The religious education of the entire public also led to the de -
mocratization of leadership in Judaism. The fact that even laws 
about the priests were addressed to the public as a whole put 
the public in a position to supervise the priests, as the rabbis per -
ceived. As a result, expertise in religion did not remain confined 
to the hereditary priesthood, and it became possible for any Jew 
who had the intellectual qualifications, irrespective of family 
background, to master it. This is the significance of the fact that 
rabbis rather than priests are the religious leaders in Judaism. 3 
 THE JPS TORAH 
COMMENTARY: 
DEUTERONOMY
JEFFREY TIGAY NEHEMIAH 8:8THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 4  THE PUBLIC READING OF SCRIPTUREJesus and the apostles participated in traditional weekly 
readings from the Torah and the Prophets in the synagogue. 
It was in this context that Jesus launched his mission after 
publicly reading from the book of Isaiah. Later, Paul and 
Barnabas used this time to announce the good news of Jesus’ 
life, death, and resurrection.
From Perga they went on to Pisidian Antioch. On the Sabbath 
they entered the synagogue and sat down. After the reading 
from the Law and the Prophets, the leaders of the synagogue 
sent word to them, saying, “Brothers, if you have a word of ex -
hortation for the people, please speak.”
This tradition formed the pattern for reading the apostles’ 
writings out loud during Christian worship gatherings.
I charge you before the Lord to have this letter read to 
all the brothers and sisters.
After this letter has been read to you, see that it is also read in 
the church of the Laodiceans and that you in turn read the letter 
from Laodicea.
Until I come, devote yourself to the public reading of Scripture, 
to preaching and to teaching.
Conclusion
As the author of life, Jesus has included all of us into his grand 
narrative. Publicly reading Scripture allows us to understand 
our place in it as a community. It also wields power to 
challenge whatever preexisting stories we have about God, 
ourselves, and the world. Biblical narrative and poetry creates 
an active environment inside our imagination, shaping the very 
fabric of what we believe to be plausible!
This is, I think, one of the reasons why God has given us so much 
story, so much narrative in Scripture. Story authority is the au -
thority that really works, because stories determine how we see 
ourselves, others and the world, and how we experience God. 
Throw a rule book at people’s head, or offer them a list of doc -
trines, and they can duck or avoid it, or simply disagree and go 
away. Tell them a story, though, and invite them into a commu -
nity of people living by that story, and you invite them to step 
into a different world; you invite them to share an entire world -
view. And when someone comes into the Gospel story and finds 
how compelling it is, it begins to quietly shatter the worldview 
that they were in already. There is no telling what can happen, 
when God himself, breathes new lives and new worlds into being 
through his word.1 TIMOTHY 4:13–14ACTS 13:14
COLOSSIANS 4:161 THESSALONIANS 5:27
HOW CAN THE BIBLE 
BE AUTHORITATIVE?
N.T. WRIGHTTHE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 5  THE PUBLIC READING OF SCRIPTURE
Discussion Questions
1 In the book, “Truth Is Stranger Than It Used to Be: 
Biblical Faith in a Postmodern World,” the authors asks 
five questions that every worldview attempts to answer.                            
Throughout your life, what narratives have you drawn upon to 
answer these questions? What about your larger community?
2 Is gathering in a synagogue, church, or Bible study to hear the 
story of Scripture the same as people gathering to watch a 
play or a film? What’s similar? What’s different?
3 Read Deuteronomy 5:15. Notice that part of the fourth 
commandment is simply to remember what God has done. 
Does breaking this commandment cause us to break the 
others as well? Why or why not?
4 After the time of Joshua comes an era of Judges in Israel’s 
history. Read Judges 2:6-23 which introduces a brand new 
generation in verse ten. Keep flipping through your Bible 
and discuss other periods where Israel forgot their identity. 
Imagine ways the story could have been different if Israel was 
faithful in publicly reading Scripture.
5 Paul says believers are “living epistles” (2 Corinthians 3:2). 
How is sharing the good news of Jesus similar or different to 
publicly reading Scripture? How was your identity transformed 
when you heard the gospel story?
6 Jesus is the Word, the very incarnation and fulfillment of 
the Scriptures living within us. How does our life in Christ 
transform our understanding of the Bible? Check out 2 
Corinthians 3:14 and John 5:39-40 for talking points.
Setting:  Where are we? What is real in the world where we find ourselves? 
Characters: Who are we? What is the nature and purpose of human beings? 
Conflict:  What’s wrong? How do we account for evil and pain? 
Resolution:  What’s the solution? What’s the hope for a better future?  
Narrative Time:  What time is it? Where in the storyline is the reader located?