The Prophets 
Study Notes
Introduction 
The books of the Old Testament prophets are filled with dense poetry and vivid imagery. 
If you’ve tried to read them, odds are you were both intrigued and confused. But 
when we learn how to read these prophetic books with attention and context, we will 
discover the fascinating role they play in the storyline of the Bible. Use these study 
notes to go deeper into the ideas from our video How to Read Bible: The Prophets.
Contents
What Is Biblical Prophecy?  2
Why Biblical Prophecy Matters  3
Who Were the Biblical Prophets?  3
What Are Prophetic Books?  4
Main Themes in the Prophetic Books  6
Common Patterns in the Prophetic Books  7
Main Characters in the Prophetic Books  7
Literary Forms and Features in Prophecy  7
Guidelines for Interpreting Prophecy  8
Key Insights From the Prophets  9
Helpful Resources  9The Prophets 2
What Is Biblical Prophecy?
The books of the Hebrew prophets are some of the most challenging books of the Bible to read, but they are 
also some of the most beautiful books. Learning to read them does take effort, but the effort is totally worth it.
The Challenge of Reading the Prophetic Books
 
Definitions of Biblical Prophecy
Biblical prophecy is not the prediction of future events, but most people understand the term prophecy 
as just that. This definition is inadequate and does not account for huge amounts of the material in 
the prophetic books. While there are certain passages within the Prophets that do contain predictive 
elements, most of these poems and narratives don’t present themselves as predictive prophecy.
In the Bible, a prophecy is a message that God speaks to his people through a human 
prophet. Thus, prophecies often contain the quoted speech of God himself. 
 
Take a look at some key biblical texts that define or illustrate the nature of prophecy.The prophets have an odd way of talking, like people who, instead of proceeding 
in an orderly manner, ramble off from one thing to the next, so that you 
cannot make head or tail of them or see what they are getting at.
Martin Luther, quoted in Gerhard von Rad, Old Testament Theology Vol . 2, 33
What makes the prophetic books particularly, and one might say needlessly, difficult is 
the very manner of their arrangement—or, to be more accurate, their apparent lack of 
arrangement … All seems confusion … The impression that the reader gains is one of 
extreme disarray; one can scarcely blame him for concluding that he is reading a hopeless 
hodgepodge thrown together without any discernible principle of arrangement at all.
John Bright, Jeremiah (Anchor Bible Commentary) , ivi
Now the word of the LORD came to me saying,  
“Go and proclaim in the ears of Jerusalem, saying,  
‘Thus says the LORD: “I remember concerning 
you the devotion of your youth … "'”
Jeremiah 2:1-2
The LORD spoke to Moses, saying, “I am the LORD; speak to 
Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I speak to you.” Then the LORD 
said to Moses, “See, I make you as God to Pharaoh, and your 
brother Aaron shall be your prophet. You shall speak all that I 
command you, and your brother Aaron shall speak to Pharaoh.”
Exodus 6:28-7:2I am filled with power—  
with the Spirit of the LORD—  
and with justice and courage  
to make known to Jacob his rebellious act,  
even to Israel his sin.
Micah 3:8
Now these are the last words of David.  
David the son of Jesse declares,  
the man who was raised on high declares,  
the anointed of the God of Jacob  
and the sweet psalmist of Israel, declares,  
“The Spirit of the LORD spoke by me,  
and his word was on my tongue.”
2 Samuel 23:1-2The Prophets 3Here we see the prophet as God’s mouthpiece, and the Spirit guides Micah to say what 
God wants his people to hear. Also, notice what God wants Micah to talk about: Israel’s sin 
and injustice. This leads us to the purpose and role of the biblical prophets. 
Why Biblical Prophecy Matters
The Prophets are the bridge between the past story of Israel and the covenant and 
the future story of God’s rescue plan for the world through Jesus.
Did you know that the prophetic books take up as much page space in the Bible as the entire New Testament?
Also, in the New Testament itself, Jesus and the apostles constantly quoted the Prophets 
to explain how Jesus was bringing Israel’s story to its fulfillment. The Prophets are quoted 
77 times in the Gospels and 98 times in the rest of the New Testament. 
Who Were the Biblical Prophets?
There were more Israelite prophets than the fifteen who have books named after them 
in the Hebrew Bible. These other prophets include Deborah (Judg. 5), Gad (1 Sam. 22:5), 
Nathan (2 Sam. 7, 12), Elijah and Elisha, Micaiah (1 Kgs. 22), and many more.
Moses is a key figure in the lineup of prophets because he is portrayed as the archetypal prophet.
• He is the first divine spokesman sent to Israel and the nations (Exod. 3).
• He is the first figure to mediate between Yahweh and Israel and establish 
Yahweh’s covenant with the people (Exod. 19-24, the Sinai narrative).
• He is the only figure allowed to enter the divine presence directly (Exod. 19-20, 33-34).
• He is the key intercessor for Israel when they have violated the covenant (Exod. 32-34). 
• He suffers because of Israel’s failures (Num. 11-21), and accuses them of present and 
ongoing rebellion against Yahweh that will result in exile (Deut. 28-32).
• His death is marked as the end of an era. Deuteronomy 34:10 says, “Since that time no 
prophet has risen in Israel like Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face ...”
The prophets are best understood as covenant watchdogs. They carry the 
larger covenant story of Yahweh, creation, and Israel.
2 Kings 17:13 summarizes the message of the prophets to Israel.
 
For every significant king in Israel’s history, there was a prophet on his heels.The Lord warned Israel and Judah through all his prophets saying, 
“Turn from your evil ways. Observe my commands and decrees, in 
accordance with the entire Law that I commanded your ancestors to 
obey and that I delivered to you through my servants the prophets.”
Prophet Samuel Nathan Gad Ahijah Elijah Elisha Isaiah
King Saul David Solomon Jeroboam Ahab JehoshaphatAhaz and 
HezekiahThe Prophets 412 of the 15 prophetic books begin with a historical note telling us when that prophet lived and 
the kings they held accountable. It’s worth going back to the books of Samuel-Kings to read 
about those specific kings to remember the context of the prophet you’re reading.
A helpful fact to remember about the relationship between a prophet and the current king is how kings were viewed in 
the ancient Near East. Unlike in Egypt, where the kings were considered divine, Israelite kings were viewed as humans 
who were subject to the law of God’s covenant justice. Prophets helped keep the Israelite kings accountable to God. 
The Covenant Story of Yahweh, Creation, and Israel
1. Yahweh is the creator and king, whose image-bearing stewards have 
rebelled and corrupted his good world (Gen. 1-11).
2. In the covenant with Abraham, Yahweh will use Abraham’s family to 
restore his divine blessing to all nations (Gen. 12).
3. In the covenant with Israel (also known as the Sinai or Mosaic covenant), Yahweh calls Israel to become 
a kingdom of priests to the nations by adhering to the laws of the covenant. Obedience will result 
in covenant blessing, and rebellion will bring covenant curses (Exod. 19, Lev. 26, Deut. 28-30).
4. In the covenant with Israel’s priesthood, Yahweh will provide a perpetual priesthood through the 
line of Aaron to intercede on Israel’s behalf and atone for their covenant failures (Num. 25).
5. In the covenant with Israel’s monarchy, Yahweh will raise up a king from the line of David who 
will bring God’s kingdom and blessing to all the nations (2 Sam. 7; Ps. 2, 72, 89, 132).
6. In the new covenant, Israel was unable to fulfill its side of the Sinai covenant and was sent into exile. But in the 
future, Yahweh will transform their hearts so they can truly love and obey their God (Deut. 30, Jer. 31, Ezek. 36).
What Are Prophetic Books? 
The fifteen prophetic books (three major prophetic books and 12 minor prophetic books) are a mosaic collection 
of narratives, poems, and essays that represent the message of the Israelite prophets. These collections were 
expertly crafted over a long period of time, and were eventually integrated into the larger collection of the Hebrew 
Bible. Many of the prophetic books begin with editorial introductions that coordinate the collection within the 
narrative context provided by Genesis-2 Kings and Ezra-Nehemiah. Take a look at the verses below for examples.  
These prophetic scrolls came into existence through a lengthy process that began 
with the prophet’s own calling and message to his contemporaries.The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz 
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, which he 
saw during the reigns of Uzziah, Jotham, 
Ahaz and Hezekiah, kings of Judah. 
[cross-references to 2 Kings 14-20]
Isaiah 1:1 In the second year of Darius the king, on 
the first day of the sixth month, the word of 
the LORD came by the prophet Haggai to 
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of 
Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, 
the high priest. [cross-references to Ezra 1-6]
Haggai 1:1   The Prophets 5The Family Quilt Metaphor
A quilt made of many pre-existing materials can both retain the integrity of the earlier materials while 
giving new layers of meaning when they are set within a larger context and frame of reference. 
These books accomplish a number of important goals within this collection.
7. They are literary representations of the message of these prophets (in poetry 
and prose) passed down through the disciples of the prophets.
8. These traditions have been intentionally woven together and set within a narrative 
framework (the superscriptions within all the prophetic books plus the narrative blocks 
within them) that ties them into the main theological themes of Genesis-Kings.
For more on this idea, read Isaiah 8:10-20 and Jeremiah 36, key biblical 
texts that discuss the composition of the prophetic scrolls.Events The life of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel 
Oral traditions The prophet’s own repertoire of his sermons, essays, and circuit speeches 
Early written 
collections Jeremiah 30:2  
“Write the words I’ve spoken to you in a scroll …”  
(referring to Jer. 30-31)
Isaiah 8:16  
“Bind up the testimony, seal up the Torah among my disciples.”
Habakkuk 2:2-3  
“Write down the vision, and make it clear on tablets ...”  
(referring to Hab. 2)
Proto-editions of 
biblical books Jeremiah chapter 36  
Jeremiah and Ezekiel edition 1.0  
Malachi 1:1-4:3
TaNaK edition of 
the ProphetsJeremiah and Ezekiel 2.0  
Malachi 4:4-6
The Prophets 6Main Themes in the Prophetic Books  
Biblical prophecy frequently deals with the following themes.
1. Accusations  that Israel and the nations have rebelled  against Yahweh.
• Israel/Judah have (1) broken the covenant, (2) worshiped other gods, (3) allowed 
social injustice, and (4) made alliances with the foreign nations.
• Key rhetorical device: the covenant lawsuit
• Key metaphor: idolatry as adultery
• Nations accused of injustice, cruelty, and arrogance.
2. Calls for repentance  and admonitions to turn from wicked ways and return to faithful obedience to Yahweh.
• Calls for religious devotion to Yahweh alone and no other gods.
• Calls for social justice and care for the most vulnerable people such as the widow, orphan, and immigrant.
3. Announcements  of the day of Yahweh that will address injustice and rebellion.
• Refers to historical events that God will use to judge evil and vindicate the righteous, all leading up 
to the great future day when God will do this for all creation, like a cosmic house cleaning.
The bad news:  Yahweh will bring his justice against human rebellion, and because 
of human hard-heartedness, future punishment becomes inevitable.
• Justice upon Israel and Judah, resulting in disaster, defeat, and exile.
• Justice upon individual nations (especially Assyria, Babylon, Egypt).
• Justice upon all nations.
The good news:  Yahweh will bring about the restoration of his covenant people on the other side of exile.
• Hope for a righteous remnant: God will preserve a faithful remnant, an important minority who remain faithful.
• Hope for a restoration from exile (captivity): God will restore their fortunes.
• Hope for a new covenant: Yahweh will renew his covenant with his people.
• The Kingdom of God: Yahweh will establish a peaceful, universal Kingdom. 
over all nations, ruled by the future messianic King.
• New temple/new Eden/new Jerusalem: God’s personal presence 
will permeate his people in a new cosmic temple.
• Messiah: The anointed one refers to a royal king figure (as promised 
to David), as well as a royal priest figure (as promised to Phine -
has)—a priest king who will rule and represent all humanity before 
God and bring God’s reign of justice and peace to the nations.
• All nations: The Gentile nations will undergo a conversion to Yah -
weh worship, and they will be gathered in and included in the 
blessings of Yahweh’s reign.
• Restored creation: The future age will be a time of glory, joy, and 
peace in God’s presence, and it will also be a time for the removal 
of sin, curses, and death.The Prophets 7Common Patterns in the Prophetic Books
Some of the prophetic books share common large scale compositional patterns.
Main Characters in the Prophetic Books
Some recurring characters in the prophetic books include: 
• Yahweh
• The prophet
• Israel and Judah
• The kings and prophets of Israel
• The righteous remnant
• The nations (especially Egypt, Assyria/Nineveh, Babylon, Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tyre/Sidon)
Literary Forms and Features in Prophecy
Each prophetic book has a unique design and an organized flow of thought, but it’s rarely chronological. Reading 
the Prophets is a lot like listening to a symphony or a concept album. There is always an opening introduction to all 
the main themes, but then the work is broken up into multiple movements or sections. If you pay attention, you’ll 
hear the key themes being repeated and developed throughout and begin to see how all the parts fit together. 
For example, the book of Ezekiel is organized into a collection of poems accusing Israel of worshipping other gods 
and calling the people to turn back to God (Ezek. 1-24). This section is followed by a section filled with accusations 
of violence and arrogance against the nations (Ezek. 25-32). However, when Ezekiel finds out Jerusalem has been 
destroyed and the people have been carried into exile (Ezek. 33), the book transitions into poems about future 
hope after exile. These poems talk about how God will raise up a messianic king and bring his people back from 
exile and renew his covenant with them (Ezek. 34-48). The overarching theme throughout all these sections is 
the presence of God. Ezekiel highlights how the personal presence of God left the Jerusalem temple because of 
Israel’s idolatry, but after the exile God promises that his presence will return one day (Ezek. 1, 11, 36, 40-48).Isaiah Jeremiah Ezekiel Zephaniah
Judgments 
Against Israel1-12 1-25 4-24 1:1-2:3
Judgments 
Against Nations13-23 46-51 25-32 2:4-15
Announcements 
of Salvation40-55 26-35 33-48 3:9-20The Prophets 8Other Literary Forms and Features of Prophecy 
• The use of the phrase, “Thus says the LORD ...” indicates the claim made by the prophets that they 
are actually speaking for God. This phrase usually marks a new structural division as well.
• The quoted speech of God uses a lot of first person pronouns such as “I,” “me,” “my,” and “mine” in reference 
to Yahweh (rather than the prophetic author). Most often when God speaks, it is in poetic verse.
• Rhetorical questions are used extensively.
• Lawsuit: a legal charge is brought against Israel/Judah for having broken the terms of their covenant with God.
• The prophets perform symbolic actions.
• The use of satire and irony: “Prophecy which seeks to instruct, amend, and reform 
also seeks to offend” (Thomas J. Jemielity, Satire and the Hebrew Prophets ). 
Guidelines for Interpreting Prophecy
1. Determine the literary type you are dealing with in each section. The prophetic book may contain 
narrative, poetry, and discourse all mixed within a single book. Once you have identified the type 
of literature encountered in your passages, adjust your reading expectations to fit that type.
2.  Recognize that prophecy is organized topically (symphonically) rather than chronologically 
or sequentially. Then seek to understand its structure and the arrangement of 
the parts on the basis of either theme, content, or literary patterns.
3. Identify figurative language. As a general rule, the Bible will interpret its own symbols 
either in the immediate context or elsewhere in the Bible. The best way to interpret 
symbols is to carefully look at the main points developed by the author in the passage, 
and then to compare that symbol with other passages by using a concordance.
4. Investigate whether the passage is using earlier Scriptures. Frequently, the prophets build on or 
allude to prior passages (especially from the Pentateuch). They also commonly contest how the 
priests, leaders, and false prophets have interpreted the earlier promises of God to their forefathers. 
When this is the case, make sure that you understand these background passages.
5.  Determine the author’s purpose from the text. What kind of response is the author trying 
to elicit from the reader? Think of emotions like joy, hope, comfort, repentance, fear, shock, 
awe, or worship and so on. What kinds of sins are exposed, and what would be their modern 
day equivalents? What is the basis of its hope? What is the content of its hope?
6. Be on the lookout for dramatic literary techniques. The prophets, generally speaking, stood against the 
status quo of society. Their message was seen as radical and usually offensive to the listeners. The prophets 
can be characterized as unwanted, annoying interrupters in the lives of their contemporaries. The prophets’ 
speech, artistic skill, rhetorical courage, emotional sensitivity, and political chutzpah all stand free of the 
dominant conventions—free to protest against, free to disclose change, free to move to better worlds. As a 
result, be especially alert to the presence of satire and irony, two tactics often used by critics of society.The Prophets 9Key Insights From the Prophets
1. God loves justice. Israel is called to a higher level of justice than the nations around 
them, especially in the treatment of their land and the poor (see Isa. 1:10-20).
2. God gets angry at evil. The prophets give a lot of space to God’s exposure of the evil among Israel and the 
nations. It’s intense, but it reveals how much God cares about the goodness of his world (see Hos. 13).
3. God has hope for our world. God refuses to let Israel’s sin get the last word, and so all the prophetic books 
contain profound images of future hope and restoration for God’s people and for the entire world (see Isa. 11:1-9).
Helpful Resources
Heschel, Abraham. The Prophets . New York: Perennial Classics, 1962.
Lubeck, Ray. Read the Bible for a Change: Understanding and Responding to God’s Word.  Eugene: Wipf & Stock, 2018. 
McConville, J. Gordon. Exploring the Old Testament: A Guide to the Prophets.  Downers Grove: IVP Academic, 2002.  
Sailhamer, John. NIV Compact Bible Commentary . New York: Zondervan Academic, 1999.