What Is the Bible? 
Study Notes
Introduction
The Bible is in itself a small library of books, all of which emerged from the 
history of the people of ancient Israel. It is the most influential book in the 
history of Western and much of Eastern civilization. People have a lot of 
opinions regarding what it means, but let’s just start with what it is.What Is the Bible? 2* “TaNaK” and “The Old Testament” are identical texts.  The difference is in their ordering as well 
as some of the books being broken into separate volumes.   (e.g. 1st & 2nd Chronicles).Old Testament 
Written in ancient Hebrew and Aramaic over the span of more than 1000 years, the TaNaK  contains 24 books 
(39 in the Christian count*). The books emerge from the history of ancient Israel. They tell of their birth 
as a nation, their history in the land (called Israel-Palestine today), exile from it, return, and their eventual 
rebuilding around the city of Jerusalem. Furthermore, it is the story of Israel’s origin as Abraham’s family, 
how God promised to bless all nations through him via a messianic king—who one day would come.
What Is the Bible? 3New Testament 
27 books emerged out of the movement started by Jesus of Nazareth. All of them were 
written in Greek by Jewish authors who had become Jesus’ disciples. 
What Is the Bible? 4Canon Variations 
The previous pages list books included in the “standard” Bible or Protestant Bible containing 39 Old Testament 
and 27 New Testament books.  Whereas the Hebrew Bible is centered solely on the TaNaK alone, Orthodox 
and Catholic Bibles include second temple period writings in addition to the Old and New Testaments. 
What Is the Bible? 5Discussion Questions 
1. Why did God choose to reveal God’s self through the history, struggles, and meditations 
of one  particular people situated in one particular corner of the earth?
2. How do the diverse genres of poetry, letters, law texts, and wisdom writings complement the  narrative texts 
and thus contribute to our overall understanding of the overarching story? Why the diversity of genres?
3. What is the value in God revealing God’s self through texts spread out 
over 1000 years and written by different authors?
4. What are the advantages or pitfalls to different Christian traditions 
including different lists of  writings into the Bible?
5. Does this story continue on in Christian believers today? If so, how? If not, what is fundamentally 
different between the story of the Bible and the story of the Church as lived out today?