What is the Day of the Lord?
The Day of the Lord is a phrase used in the Bible to describe how 
God is at work in history to confront collective human evil,  liberate 
his people from oppression, and assert his rule over all creation.
Rebellion from the Garden to Babylon
Genesis 3-11 traces the theme of humanity’s 
spreading rebellion and the violence and disaster 
that results.
Humans first rebel in the garden by redefining good and evil on 
their own terms. The book of Genesis recounts the consequences 
in the following chapters. In chapter 3, Adam and Eve distrust each 
other, and they “hide” from each other and from God. In chapter 4, 
Cain’s jealousy leads to murder, and his city is characterized by the 
violent and abusive Lamech. In chapter 6, the “Sons of God” take 
interest in human women, which leads to more violence. Finally, 
the tracing of this theme culminates with the rebellion at Babylon, 
or the T ower of Babel.
• Babel is Babylon. Although ancient Babylon was powerful, it 
was not an empire. Genesis depicts ancient Babylon in terms 
of what it will become in world history and in Israel’s story. 
Genesis 11 is preparing for Israel’s exile to Babylon in 2 Kings 
24-25.
• The tower is representative of humanity’s first unified 
attempt to assert its divine authority through technology and 
temple building (brick and tar).
• In the Bible, Babylon and its mythology becomes an 
archetype of humanity in rebellion against the one true God 
and the resulting violence and injustice.
What is God going to do? Who’s going to hold Babylon 
accountable?
Day of the Lord
Study Notes  
NOTE:
Babylon has roots 
in mythology 
surrounding the 
god, Marduk. He 
was the patron of 
the city of Babylon 
and the son of the 
chief of gods. When 
the Neo-Babylonian 
empire rose as a world 
empire in the 7th and 
6th centuries B.C., 
the myth developed 
in the Enuma Elish . 
According to this 
myth, Marduk defeats 
the forces of chaos 
and ascends to the 
throne of the high god.
Learn more and 
watch our videos at 
thebibleproject.comTHE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 2  DAY OF THE LORD
Egypt Becomes the New Babylon
In Genesis 11-12, God calls one family out 
of the scattering of Babylon and promises to 
restore divine blessing to all nations through this 
particular family. 
But how? The family grows larger and ends up in Egypt. Initially 
things are going well, but then Exodus happens.
Now a new king arose over Egypt, who did not know Joseph. He said 
to his people, “Behold, the people of the sons of Israel are more nu -
merous and mightier than us. Come, let us deal wisely with them, 
or else they will multiply, and in the event of war, they will also join 
themselves to those who hate us and fight against us and depart from 
the land.
So they appointed taskmasters over them to afflict them with hard 
labor. And they built for Pharaoh storage cities, Pithom and Raamses. 
But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and the 
more they spread out, so that they were in dread of the sons of Israel.
The Egyptians compelled the sons of Israel to labor rigorously; and 
they made their lives bitter with hard labor in mortar and bricks and 
at all kinds of labor in the field, all their labors which they rigorously 
imposed on them.
At this point, Egypt has become Babylon. Their cities and ‘brick and 
mortar’ are built on the blood of the innocent. Egypt has redefined 
good and evil, so that murdering children and enslaving immigrants 
is seen as good. The story diagnoses this “evil” as refusing to 
acknowledge Yahweh as the one true God. 
God’s justice is brought upon Egypt in the ten 
plagues, culminating in the death of the firstborn 
and the defeat of Pharaoh by the Sea of Reeds. 
The defeat of Egypt/Babylon’s evil and the liberation of his 
enslaved people is the first Day of the Lord.
Thus the Lord saved Israel that day from the hand of the Egyptians, 
and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the seashore. When Israel saw 
the great power which the Lord had used against the Egyptians, the 
people feared the Lord, and they believed in the Lord and in His ser -
vant, Moses.
This day is memorialized in the feast of Passover.
Moses said to the people, “Remember this day in which you went out 
from Egypt, from the house of slavery; for by a powerful hand the 
Lord brought you out from this place. And nothing leavened shall be 
eaten.1
2EXODUS 1:8-14
NOTE 
In Exodus 5:2, 
Pharaoh says, “Who is 
Yahweh that I should 
listen to his voice and 
let Israel go? I don’t 
know (acknowledge) 
Yahweh, and I will 
not let Israel go. ”
EXODUS 14:30-31
EXODUS 13:3THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 3  DAY OF THE LORDThe first praise song in the Bible celebrates God’s victory over evil 
and the Day of the Lord. It concludes by linking together the ideas 
of the Day of the Lord with God’s defeat of evil and his reign as 
king. 
Then Moses and the sons of Israel sang this song to the Lord, and said,
“I will sing to the Lord, for He is highly exalted;
the horse and its rider He has hurled into the sea.
The Lord is my strength and song,
and He has become my salvation;
this is my God, and I will praise Him;
my father’s God, and I will extol Him.
The Lord is a warrior;
the Lord is His name.
You will bring the people you have purchased
and plant them in the mountain of Your inheritance,
the place, O Lord, which You have made for Your dwelling,
the sanctuary, O Lord, which Your hands have established.
The Lord reigns as king forever and ever.
The stories of Babylon and the Exodus became the archetype for 
how God confronts human evil in scripture. If an empire doesn’t 
submit itself to God’s rule and liberate the oppressed, God will 
orchestrate events to bring about its downfall and replace it with 
his own kingdom.
Israel Becomes Babylon
As it grows, Israel becomes wealthy, apathetic, 
unjust, and idolatrous. 
They take their status for granted and assume that their God will 
always be for them and against their enemies. The story of King 
Solomon in 1 Kings is where this becomes apparent.
Solomon’s reign is divided into three parts.
Promising beginnings and successes
• David charges Solomon to follow the commands of the 
T orah. 
• Solomon asks God for “a heart that listens, to rule your 
people, to discern between good and evil. ” 
• God honors his request and rewards Solomon with 
wealth and kavod.
Wealth, honor, and building projects
• Solomon’s kingdom starts to look more and more like 
Egypt/Babylon.
• He spends seven years building the temple with slave 
labor and fourteen years building his own palace.
• Solomon marries Pharaoh’s daughter and accepts her 
dowry: the Canaanite city of Gezer, which the pharaoh 
had burned and cleared.EXODUS 15:1-3
EXODUS 15:17-18
1 KINGS 1-3 
1 KINGS 4-10 Part 1:
Part 2:THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 4  DAY OF THE LORD• Solomon imports six hundred sixty-six talents of gold 
per year. Five hundred gold shields hang in his palace 
above a huge throne of ivory surrounded by twelve 
lions. He imports gold, silver, ivory, apes, peacocks, and 
fourteen hundred chariots and horses from Egypt. 
Idolatry, rebellion, and the fall of this “Babylon”
• Solomon accumulates seven hundred wives and three 
hundred concubines, a combination of political alliances 
and marriages. 
• He gives allegiance to the gods Asherah, Milcom, 
Chemosh, and Molech.
• God allows Israel’s enemies to overtake their land. The 
unified kingdom of David is split into tribal states of 
Israelites, which are then picked off slowly over the next 
two hundred and fifty years.
The Day of the Lord Brings the Downfall 
of Every Babylon
Once Israel becomes like Babylon and Egypt, they 
become the target of the Day of the Lord . 
Amos reverses Israel’s expectations about the Day of the Lord.
Woe to you who long
for the Day of the Lord!
Why do you long for the Day of the Lord?
That day will be darkness, not light.
He goes on to explain why citing Israel’s injustice, abuse of the 
poor, idolatry, and neglect of the laws of the T orah. He warns of a 
great oppressing army who will conquer Israel and take them into 
exile. Habakkuk tells of who that army will be.
Look among the nations! Observe!
Be astonished! Wonder!
Because I am doing something in your days—
you would not believe if you were told.
For behold, I am raising up the Chaldeans, *
that fierce and impetuous people
who march throughout the earth
to seize dwelling places which are not theirs.
God is going to bring the Day of the Lord on Israel-become-
Babylon by allowing the actual Babylon to defeat them. The Day of 
the Lord is allowing the nations to rise and fall by their own greed 
and evil one after the other in a sequence of self-destruction. 
Habakkuk is concerned about this, so God gives him a vision of 
the end of the whole cycle in Habakkuk 2. In this chapter, God 
decrees a limit to human evil. The final poem in chapter 3 describes 
a day when God will confront Babylon and defeat its evil. It’s a 
poetic retelling of Egypt’s defeat at the Red Sea, but it’s even more 
extreme. Habakkuk calls it a “day of distress. ” Part 3: NOTE 
This is all contrary 
to the laws of the 
Israelite kings in 
Deuteronomy 17.
1 KINGS 11
AMOS 5:18
*THE BABYLONIANS
HABAKKUK 1:5-6
HABAKKUK 2-3THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 5  DAY OF THE LORDThe Day of the Lord in Hebrew Poetry
There are two types of Day of the Lord events in 
the Old T estament.
• Historical Instance: The rise and fall of “Babylons” to one 
another that show how human societies sow the seeds of 
their own destruction, providentially orchestrated by God.
• Future Instance: All of the historical instances point to the 
one “Day of the Lord. ” It is the appointed time when God 
will eventually orchestrate the downfall of all Babylons and 
replace them with his kingdom. 
The heart of Babylon is self-exaltation to divine 
rule.
Isaiah diagnoses the true problem of Babylon and the human 
condition as self-exaltation. 
The Lord Almighty has a day in store
for all the proud and lofty…
The arrogance of man will be brought low
and human pride humbled;
the Lord alone will be exalted in that day,
and the idols will totally disappear.
People will flee to caves in the rocks
and to holes in the ground
from the fearful presence of the Lord
and the splendor of his majesty,
when he rises to shake the earth.
Babylon overreached when it came to Jerusalem, so God 
orchestrated the downfall of Babylon itself. 
They come from faraway lands,
from the ends of the heavens—
the Lord and the weapons of his wrath—
to destroy the whole country.
Wail, for the day of the Lord is near;
it will come like destruction from the Almighty.
But why? What has Babylon done? 
How you have fallen from heaven, 
morning star* , son of the dawn! 
You have been cast down to the earth, 
you who once laid low the nations! 
You said in your heart, “I will ascend to the heavens; 
I will raise my throne above the stars of God; 
I will sit enthroned on the mount of assembly, 
on the utmost heights of Mount Zaphon. 
I will ascend above the tops of the clouds; 
I will make myself like the Most High. ” 
But you are brought down to the realm of the dead, 
to the depths of the pit. 1
2
ISAIAH 2:12;17-19
ISAIAH 13:5-6
NOTE
Morning star:
star of dawn 
 Hebrew: helel
Greek: heosphoros 
Latin: luciferus
ISAIAH 14:12-15THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 6  DAY OF THE LORDIsaiah draws upon the ancient mythology of Marduk. Marduk was 
the son of the chief god, but he elevated himself to the place of 
the high god, so he was brought down. Isaiah sees dark spiritual 
powers at work when nations exalt themselves, their interests, 
and their power as divine. These powers that animate empires and 
nations will be brought down. 
The Day of the Lord as a Great War
All of these poetic depictions about the Day of the Lord involve 
battlefield images of smoke, fire, carnage, and earthquakes that are 
poetically enhanced.
The stars of heaven and their constellations
will not show their light.
The rising sun will be darkened
and the moon will not give its light.
I will punish the world for its evil,
the wicked for their sins.
The sun and moon will be darkened,
and the stars no longer shine.
The Lord will roar from Zion
and thunder from Jerusalem;
the earth and the heavens will tremble.
The great day of the Lord is near—
near and coming quickly.
The cry on the day of the Lord is bitter;
the Mighty Warrior shouts his battle cry.
That day will be a day of wrath—
a day of distress and anguish,
a day of trouble and ruin,
a day of darkness and gloom,
a day of clouds and blackness—
a day of trumpet and battle cry
against the fortified cities
and against the corner towers.
But, like the Exodus story, the prophets know that God will deliver 
those who cry out to him in humility and repentance. Both Joel and 
Zephaniah hold out hope for Israel and the nations.
The sun will be turned to darkness
and the moon to blood
before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord.
And everyone who calls
on the name of the Lord will be saved;
for on Mount Zion and in Jerusalem
there will be deliverance,
as the Lord has said,
even among the survivors
whom the Lord calls. 3
 ISAIAH 13:10-11
JOEL 3:15-16
ZEPHANIAH 1:14-16
JOEL 2:31-32THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 7  DAY OF THE LORD
“Therefore wait for me, ”
declares the Lord, 
“for the day I will stand up to testify. 
I have decided to assemble the nations, 
to gather the kingdoms 
and to pour out my wrath on them— 
all my fierce anger. 
The whole world will be consumed 
by the fire of my jealous anger. 
Then I will purify the lips of the peoples,
that all of them may call on the name of the Lord
and serve him shoulder to shoulder.
From beyond the rivers of Cush 
my worshipers, my scattered people,
will bring me offerings. ”
 
God is depicted as a warrior king who is on a mission to defeat 
evil among Israel and the nations, to liberate the oppressed and 
helpless, and to save a people out of this evil age and bring them 
into a new Jerusalem and a new promised land.
 
The Great Day of the Lord Begins with 
Jesus’ War on Evil. 
The Day of the Lord theme is crucial for 
understanding how Jesus thought of himself and his 
calling.
In Jesus’ day, Israel was once more a subjugated people. With the 
Roman empire ruling over them, people were hoping that the Day 
of the Lord would come again and defeat Rome. Jesus believed a 
war was on and that he was a king on the offensive. He believed 
there were powerful forces of evil at work in the world—spiritual 
and human—that corrupted people and resulted in violence. Jesus 
shared Isaiah’s view that dark, spiritual powers were the real 
enemy.1NOTE 
The entire chapter 
reads like a new 
version of Exodus 15.
ZEPHANIAH 3:9-10THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 8  DAY OF THE LORDJesus battles spiritual evil personally and in the 
community.
He confronted a spiritual power of evil in the wilderness that was 
tempting him to compromise his calling to be the suffering servant 
and instead embrace the way of independence and military power. 
After this victory over evil personally, Jesus launched his kingdom’s 
battle against forces of spiritual evil that were destroying the 
people of Israel. When confronted about his exorcisms, Jesus told 
the parables of the warring house and strong man. 
Jesus knew their thoughts and said to them, “Every kingdom divid -
ed against itself will be ruined, and every city or household divided 
against itself will not stand. If Satan drives out Satan, he is divided 
against himself. How then can his kingdom stand? And if I drive out 
demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your people drive them out? So 
then, they will be your judges. But if it is by the Spirit of God* that I 
drive out demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you. Or 
again, how can anyone enter a strong man’s house and carry off his 
possessions unless he first ties up the strong man? Then he can plun -
der his house. ”
Note Jesus’ confrontation with the demonized man in the 
graveyard in Mark 5. The demon’s name is “Legion, ” the Roman 
name for a military unit of a few thousand soldiers. Jesus is 
claiming here that his kingdom rule is striking at the heart of e vil’s 
hold on people. This shows us that Jesus’ view of evil is more 
nuanced. Evil is not to be equated with any single person or people 
group; rather it’s a spiritual and personal reality that has co-opted 
people individually and corporately.
How will Jesus conquer this form of evil?
 
Jesus’ Victory Over Evil: Death and 
Resurrection
The Gospels present Jesus’ ultimate confrontation 
with evil taking place in Jerusalem. He enters the 
city as a king and calls out the leaders of Israel and 
Rome as false.
Pilate summoned Jesus and asked him, “Are you the king of the 
Jews?” ... And Jesus said, “My kingdom is not from this world. If it were, 
my servants would fight to prevent my arrest by the Jewish leaders. 
But now my kingdom is from another place.
Israel’s leaders work with Rome to have Jesus killed. The Gospel 
authors see the forces of spiritual evil behind this.
And Satan entered into Judas who was called Iscariot, belonging to 
the number of the twelve. And he went away and discussed with the 
chief priests and officers how he might betray Him to them.2
LUKE 11:17-22
JOHN 18:33,36
LUKE 22:3-4THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 9  DAY OF THE LORDThen Jesus said to the chief priests, the officers of the temple guard, 
and the elders, who had come for him, “Am I leading a rebellion, that 
you have come with swords and clubs? Every day I was with you in 
the temple courts, and you did not lay a hand on me. But this is your 
hour—when darkness reigns. ”
Jesus allowed himself to undergo the Day of the Lord (the wrath 
of Rome), so that Israel wouldn’t have to. Jesus’ crucifixion is the 
key part of the great Day of the Lord. He conquers evil and death 
by letting evil conquer him. The judge is judged, and the victim 
becomes the victor.
Jesus’ Final Battle Against Evil: The 
Ultimate Day of the Lord 
Revelation depicts the downfall of Babylon.
In Revelation, the unified kingdoms of the world are called “ ...the 
great city, which is spiritually called ‘Sodom’ and ‘Egypt’ where 
even their Lord was crucified. ” Jerusalem itself has become Sodom-
Egypt-Babylon.
Babylon is portrayed as a dragon and called “Babylon the great. ” 
It’s depicted as insanely wealthy which should make you think of 
Solomon’s Jerusalem. It is slave-trading and idolatrous. 
Jesus shows up for the final battle.
The Day of the Lord in Revelation is described as a final battle 
involving all nations with swords and blood. But John has 
intentionally turned all of these symbols inside out in light of the 
cross.
• Jesus is announced as a victorious lion, but when John sees 
Jesus, he’s a slaughtered lamb.
• Jesus comes riding on a white horse with a sword, but the 
sword is “in his mouth. ”
• He comes with blood on his robe, but the blood is his own. 
These images describe how his victory came not through military 
means, but through his loving announcement of the kingdom. 
Jesus’ judgment is the peoples’ rejection of his self-sacrificial 
love for them. The final battle ends as God’s gloriously renewed 
creation is ushered in. 1
2 
LUKE 22:52-53
REVELATION 11:8
REVELATION 17-19
REVELATION 19-20
REVELATION 5:5,6
REVELATION 19:11-21
REVELATION 19:13
Conclusion:
The history of the term Day of the Lord spans from Genesis to 
Revelation. It is a phrase used in the Bible to describe how God is 
at work in history to confront collective human evil, liberate his 
people from oppression, and assert his rule over all creation.THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 10  DAY OF THE LORD
Discussion Questions
What might the phrase Day of the Lord mean to an 
average person walking down the street?
Discuss the relationship between the Day of the 
Lord and Babylon as it unfolds from Genesis to 
Revelation. What strikes you the most?
Focus on Solomon’s kingdom in 1 Kings. What are 
the key attributes defining Israel’s transformation 
into an “Israel-become-Babylon?” 
Where might you find these attributes at work 
in our contemporary world? Furthermore, is an 
allegiance to Babylon stark or subtle?
When the Day was announced by Amos as being 
directed against Israel, what exactly was being 
rescued and liberated there?
Compare and contrast Jesus’ Day of the Lord 
victory depicted in the Gospels with that of the 
book of Revelation.
Does reading scripture about the future Day of 
the Lord force one to make choices between Jesus’ 
upside-down kingdom and Babylon? If so, how?
What does your own participation in Jesus’ new 
creation/new Jerusalem/reigning kingdom look 
like in terms of your present identity and your 
belief about the future?1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8