Justice
Study Notes
Introduction 
What is justice, and who gets to define it? In our video Justice, we explore what 
the Bible says about justice and discover how it’s rooted in the storyline that 
leads to Jesus. Go deeper into the ideas from the video with these study notes.
Contents
Justice and Righteousness  2
Mishpat: The Hebrew Word for Justice 3
Two Modes of Biblical Justice 3
Where Does Justice Come From?  4
The Character of God and Mishpat  6
Tsedeqah:  The Hebrew Word for Righteousness 8
Justice and Righteousness in the Biblical Narrative 10
1. The Image of God 10
2. Humanity Redefines Good and Evil 11
3. God’s Covenant With Abraham 11
4. Israel Enslaved 12
5. The Law 12
6. Israel Perpetuates Injustice 12
7. Jesus Fulfills the Just and Righteous Ideal  13
8. God’s Love and Justice in Jesus’ Death  13
9. Followers of Jesus Pursue Justice and Righteousness 13Justice 2Justice and Righteousness 
Our English word “justice ” is from the Latin adjective “iustus,” which means  “upright, just, or 
fair,” and the Latin noun “iustitia, ” which means “fairness, legal, or right. ” Justice refers to right 
relations between people that act as a standard for evaluating between good and bad behavior 
and fair and unfair actions, and for determining the fair consequences of such behavior. 
Justice is a complex, contested concept in our own culture. Harvard Law professor Michael San -
del wrote a book called Justice: What ’s the Right Thing to Do?  In his book, Sandel argues that the 
moral discourse about justice in our culture is in a state of confusion because different groups 
appeal to that word but mean different things by it. Let ’s look at a few different views of justice. 
• Maximizing welfare view: Justice is the action that brings the greatest 
good and reduces the greatest harm to the greatest number of people.
• Respecting freedom view: Justice is whatever creates the greatest level of 
respect for the rights and freedoms of each individual to live how they choose.
• Promoting virtue view: Justice is what directs people to act as they ought 
to, in accordance with moral virtue.
The biblical vision of justice actually taps into all three of these views, but with a slightly differ -
ent emphasis. One of the most famous biblical statements about justice comes from the book 
of Micah. 
Micah 6:8
God has told you, O human, what is good;  
And what does the Lord require of you  
But to do justice , to love mercy , 
And to walk humbly with your God ?
As we seek to understand biblical justice, we should be aware of our tendency to impose our 
modern ethical or political categories onto the Bible and use bits and pieces of Scripture to 
support our particular view of justice. Justice 3Mishpat : The Hebrew Word for Justice
Mishpat  refers to the actions we take to create a community of justice so that all people are 
treated fairly.  
In the context of the prophet Micah, he was exposing the leaders of Israelite cities and their 
unjust actions. These wealthy leaders owned land and ran the economy, but they cared more 
about power and money than justice. They were guilty of buying land from lower income 
landowners through bullying (Mic. 2:2) and changing land boundaries (Mic. 2:4-5, 9). They 
bribed local judges and prophets (Mic. 3) and rigged the weights and measures in their favor 
(Mic. 6:10-11). 
For Micah, existing as a human before God means to do what is right and just  and to love 
mercy,  that is, to do the right things for the right reason on behalf of others. 
Two Modes of Biblical Justice
1. Retributive/Recompense 
This mode of justice is like the punishment/reward system in a court of law, ensuring 
there is recompense, repayment, or acquittal for just or unjust behavior. If you steal 
five dollars, you have to pay back five dollars. If you ’re wrongly accused of stealing 
five dollars, you should not have to pay, and you should even be repaid for the  
trouble of being accused. 
Deuteronomy 25:1
If there is a dispute between men and they go to court (lit. to the mishpat, place 
of justice), and the judges (Heb. shophetim) decide their case, and they declare 
the innocent to be in the right, and they will declare the guilty to be in the wrong.
2. Restorative
This mode of justice is about making sure that everyone in the community is treat -
ed fairly and given what they are due. It’s about granting people rights by changing 
unjust practices or laws.  
For example, in Deuteronomy 18:1-3, the Levites didn’t inherit land because they 
served all the tribes by working in the temple. And so the other tribes were to give 
a tithe (one tenth) of their produce as offerings in the temple. This temple tax is 
called the Levites’ mishpat  (“their right,” see also Deut. 21:17 “right of the firstborn”).  
In Israel, there was another group in their society who had unique mishpat : the 
quartet of the vulnerable, meaning the widow, orphan, immigrant, and the poor. 
Zechariah 7:9-10
Thus has the Lord of hosts said, “Dispense true justice ( mishpat)  and practice 
mercy  and compassion each to his brother; and do not oppress the widow  or 
the orphan , the immigrant  or the poor  …”  Justice 4Ancient Israel was a network of patriarchal tribal farming communities working on ancestral 
land. If you didn ’t own land (because you were an immigrant or poor), or if you didn ’t have a 
male landowner as your guardian (because you were a widow or orphan), you didn’t have the 
basic social web of support and protection. Mishpat  was key to caring for these vulnerable  
people and honoring their rights as members of the community.  
Today, the equivalent of the Bible ’s quartet of the vulnerable would be people like refugees, 
migrant workers, unhoused people, the elderly, or single parents. In Israel, making sure these 
people have adequate resources and access to support is not called charity; it ’s called mishpat , 
and it is motivated by mercy.  Restorative justice on behalf of the poor  accounts for the vast ma -
jority of uses of mishpat in the Bible. 
Where Does Justice Come From? 
Justice is a key part of the biblical story, with the ideas of both retributive and restorative 
justice being introduced in the early chapters of Genesis. We also get a picture of what an 
unjust society looks like in Babel/Babylon—they have no regard for the vulnerable or moral 
uprightness. But the idea of justice, as it applies to God ’s people, takes more concrete shape 
in the Exodus narrative.
Exodus 1-2: Portrait of Babylon and Egypt ’s Enslavement of Israel
The portrait of Egypt ’s injustice is even more developed than Babylon ’s.
• Political  (Exod. 1:8-10): The Israelites in Egypt are a refugee community, an eth -
nic minority who sought political asylum in a time of famine (see Gen. 40-50). 
• “With a change of dynasty came a change of policy. Exodus 1 por -
trays how vulnerable they were to being made the target of irratio -
nal fear, political cunning, and unjust discrimination. They had no 
political freedom or voice within the Egyptian state, even though 
they had grown in numbers … This is a story with modern echoes.” 
— Christopher J.H. Wright, The Mission of God , 268
• Economic  (Exod. 1:11-14): The Israelites are exploited for slave labor. Rath -
er than being able to use the granted land for their own benefit (under the 
original arrangement, see Gen. 47), their labor is used for Egyptian agri -
culture and construction projects.
•  “An ethnic minority does the dirty work for the king of Egypt. The modern 
echoes continue.” — Christopher J.H. Wright, The Mission of God , 269
• Social  (Exod. 1:15-22): Because enslavement doesn ’t actually kill the Israel -
ites, Pharaoh decrees a state-sponsored genocide, inciting all his people 
to a murderous campaign against Israelite babies.Justice 5The Two Modes of Justice ( Mishpat ) in the Exodus Story
• Restorative:  Justice is about liberating the oppressed by restoring their 
dignity and opportunity to flourish. 
• Exodus 6:6: “Say, therefore, to the sons of Israel, ‘I am the Lord, 
and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, 
and I will deliver you from their bondage. I will also redeem you 
with an outstretched arm and with great acts of justice. ’”
• Retributive: Justice is about confronting evil by bringing consequences 
and recompense. 
• Exodus 7:4: “When Pharaoh does not listen to you, then I will lay 
my hand on Egypt and bring out my hosts, my people the sons of 
Israel, from the land of Egypt by great acts of justice. ”
Exodus 14 is the salvation story of the Hebrew Bible—a picture of God ’s response to human 
injustice and his care for the vulnerable and oppressed.
We see God ’s character and heart for justice celebrated in the poem that follows the account. 
Exodus 15 is a poetic celebration of God as the ultimate justice-bringer for the vulnerable. And 
this isn ’t simply an abstract trait. The Israelites know God to be this way because of the events 
of the exodus.
The laws that God gives to Israel at Mount Sinai are then an embodiment of “wise justice ” before 
the nations. 
Deuteronomy 4:5-7
See, I have taught you statutes and judgments just as the Lord my God commanded me, 
that you should do thus in the land where you are entering to possess it. So keep and do 
them, for  this is your wisdom and your understanding  in the sight of the peoples who 
will hear all these statutes and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding 
people. For what great nation is there that has a god so near to it as is the Lord our God 
whenever we call on him? Or what great nation is there that has statutes and judgments 
as righteous  as this whole law which I am setting before you today?
This vision of a just society was foundational to Israel ’s laws. The laws have a clear focus on pre -
emptively identifying those most vulnerable to Babylon/Egypt-style exploitative tendencies and 
preventing those inequalities.
• Exodus 21:26-27: A slave who is beaten goes free.
• Exodus 23:9: Do not allow the oppression of the immigrant “since you know 
the life of an immigrant, for you were immigrants in the land of Egypt. ” 
• Leviticus 19:9-10: “Now when you reap the harvest of your land, you shall 
not reap to the very corners of your field, nor shall you gather the glean -
ings of your harvest. Nor shall you glean your vineyard, nor shall you 
gather the fallen fruit of your vineyard; you shall leave them for the needy 
and for the stranger. I am the Lord your God. ” 
• Deuteronomy 15: The remission of debts every seven years, the release of 
slaves every seven years and generosity toward the poor.Justice 6Not only do the laws represent wise justice, they are also a revelation of God ’s own char -
acter (Deut. 10:17-19) and a symbolic re-enactment of the Exodus story (Deut. 6:20-24). 
In following these laws, the people would be reminded of God ’s heart for justice and 
their rescue from oppression. 
Deuteronomy 10:17-19
For the LORD your God is the God of gods and the 
Lord of lords, the great, the mighty, and the awesome 
God who does not show partiality nor take a bribe. 
He executes justice for the orphan and the widow , 
and shows his love for the immigrant  by giving him 
food and clothing. So you should show your love  
for the immigrant , for you were aliens in the  
land of Egypt.Deuteronomy 6:20-24
When your son asks you in time to come, saying, “What are 
these testimonies and statutes and judgments (Heb. mis -
phatim ) which the Lord our God commanded you? ” Then 
you shall say to your son, “We were slaves to Pharaoh in 
Egypt, and the Lord brought us from Egypt with a mighty 
hand.  Moreover, the Lord showed great and distressing 
signs and wonders before our eyes against Egypt, Pharaoh 
and all his household; he brought us out from there in 
order to bring us in, to give us the land which he had 
sworn to our fathers. This is why the Lord commanded us 
to observe all these statutes …”
The Character of God and Mishpat
The character of the God of Israel is fundamentally oriented toward mishpat , and this is reflect -
ed throughout the biblical story.
Psalm 146:7-9
The LORD God, the one who upholds justice (Heb. mishpat ) for the oppressed,  
and gives food to the hungry.  
The LORD sets the prisoners free.  
The LORD opens the eyes of the blind;  
the LORD raises up those who are bowed down;  
the LORD loves the righteous;  
the LORD protects the immigrant;  
he supports the fatherless and the widow,  
but he thwarts the way of the wicked.
The story of the exodus reveals something fundamental about the character of God. Gustavo 
Guitierrez, a well-known Peruvian Catholic theologian, wrote about “God’ s preferential option 
for the poor ” in his book A Theology of Liberation . But this phrase is often misunderstood; it 
does not mean that God disregards justice if someone is poor. Leviticus 18:15 says, “You shall 
not distort justice, you shall not be partial to the poor or show favoritism to the wealthy; rather, 
you are to render justice rightly for your neighbor. ” This means that Exodus reveals God ’s special 
awareness of the plight of the socially vulnerable, and so the biblical calls to render justice for 
the poor far outnumber passages like Leviticus 18:15.Justice 7In Justice: Rights and Wrongs, Nicholas Wolterstorff says the biblical authors are very aware that 
“lower classes are not only disproportionately vulnerable to injustice, but are disproportionately 
actual victims of injustice. In human history, injustice is not equally distributed. ” This explains 
the huge call to justice for the poor in the Hebrew Bible.
Proverbs 31:8-9
Open your mouth for those who  
cannot speak for themselves,  
for the rights of those passing away.  
Open your mouth, do right justice,  
and defend the rights of the afflicted and needy.Jeremiah 9:23-24
Thus says the LORD, “Let not a wise man boast of his wisdom , 
and let not the mighty man boast of his might , let not a rich 
man boast of his riches ; but let him who boasts boast of this,  
that he understands and knows me, that I am the LORD who 
exercises mercy , justice  and righteousness  on earth; for I 
delight in these things, ” declares the LORD.Justice 8Tsedeqah : The Hebrew Word for Righteousness
Tsedeqah  is a Hebrew word that is closely linked with mishpat . Tsedeqah  is usually translated as 
“righteousness. ” The English word “righteousness ” is from the Old English rijtwis, which means 
“just, upright, virtuous. ”
The meaning of tsedeqah  is an ethical standard of right relationship. Biblical scholar J. Alec 
Motyer defines its use as “right with God and therefore committed to putting right all other rela -
tionships in life, ” and “to do right by someone. ”
Tsedeqah is the standard of right relationship between all people. And  mishpat  is the action you 
take to create the standard of tsedeqah. Biblical righteousness is about right relationships in 
day-to-day conduct in family, work, and community.
Job 29 offers the most complete definition of biblical tsedeqah.
Job 29:12-17
I delivered the poor who cried for help,  
and the orphan who had no helper.  
The blessing of the one ready to perish came upon me,  
and I made the widow ’s heart sing for joy.  
I put on tsedeqah , and it clothed me;  
mishpat was like a robe and a turban.  
I was eyes to the blind  
and feet to the lame.  
I was a father to the needy,  
and I investigated the case which I did not know.  
I broke the jaws of the wicked  
and snatched the prey from his teeth.
When these words appear as a pair, “justice and righteousness, ” they almost always overlap with 
our modern concepts of charity, generosity, and social justice (Moshe Weinfeld, Social Justice in 
Ancient Israel ). Let’ s look to this example from Ezekiel to better understand this.
Ezekiel 18:5-9
But if a man is righteous and practices mishpat  and 
tsedeqah  … if he doesn ’t oppress anyone, but restores 
to the debtor his pledge, does not commit robbery, but 
gives his bread to the hungry and covers the naked with 
clothing … then he will live.
This is a key biblical idea because the messianic hope of the prophets is for a king who will per -
fectly bring tsedeqah umishpat ( righteousness and justice) .Justice 9Isaiah 11:1-5
Then a shoot will spring from the stem of Jesse,  
and a branch from his roots will bear fruit.  
The Spirit of the LORD will rest on him,  
the spirit of wisdom and understanding,  
the spirit of counsel and strength,  
the spirit of knowledge and the fear of the LORD.  
And he will delight in the fear of the LORD,  
and he will not judge  by what his eyes see,  
nor make a decision by what his ears hear;  
but with righteousness  he will judge  the poor,  
and decide with fairness  for the afflicted of the earth;  
and he will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth,  
and with the breath of his lips he will slay the wicked.  
Also righteousness will be the belt about his loins,  
and faithfulness the belt about his waist.
In his book Social Justice in Ancient Israel , Moshe Weinfeld says, “the concept of ‘justice and 
righteousness ’ in the Bible is closely associated with mercy  and loving-kindness , with acts of 
ameliorating the situation of the destitute. This involves not simply by just treatment in court, 
but also by the elimination of exploitation and oppression and those who perpetrate them. ” 
Righteousness and justice ( tsedeqah umishpat) is always something demanded of those who 
have resources and influence (usually kings or city leaders). They are to act with righteousness 
and justice on behalf of those who have neither.Justice 10Justice and Righteousness in the Biblical Narrative
So how do the connected concepts of justice and righteousness show up in the biblical story? 
These ideas are reflected all throughout the Bible. In fact, they drive the conflict of the whole 
story—a story that finds its resolution in Jesus, who restores justice and righteousness to the 
world. Let ’s look at how these concepts shape the major themes of the Bible. 
1. The Image of God
 Humanity is an image of the divine appointed to rule the world on God ’s behalf and uphold his 
ideas of righteousness and justice.
Genesis 1:26-27
Then God said, “Let us make humanity in our image, according to 
our likeness; and let them rule over the fish of the sea and over the 
birds of the sky and over the cattle and over all the earth, and over 
every creeping thing that creeps on the earth. ” God created man 
in his own image, in the image of God he created him; male and 
female he created them.
The ideal in Genesis 1-2 defines what is “just.” Genesis 1 says humans are the image of God, 
enjoying “good ” as provided and defined by the Creator. Male and female together are ‘adam  
(humanity), and together they are to rule over creation, subduing the land and releasing its po -
tential. Genesis 2 says humans work as a unified pair to release the potential of the garden.
Humans represent God to creation, and they have inherent, sacred worth. Genesis 9:6 says, 
“Whoever sheds a human ’s blood, by a human his blood shall be shed, for in the image of God, 
he made humanity. ”
James 3:9 says, “With the same tongue we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse men, 
who have been made in the likeness of God … This should not happen! ” 
This is a uniquely Jewish-Christian contribution to the history of human civilization. For example, 
the entire Greek-Roman political system was built on the concept that all humans are  not cre -
ated equal. Aristotle argued that only rational humans are equal, which did not include slaves, 
therefore making slavery “just” from that context. 
According to the Bible, besides having inherent sacred worth, humans are also divinely appoint -
ed stewards of the world. However, this doesn ’t mean humans can do whatever they want as if 
they owned the world. Psalm 24:1 says “The earth is the Lord ’s and everything in it. ” This means 
God gave humans delegated authority  over the world ’s resources but not ownership. Justice 112. Humanity Redefines Good and Evil
When humans redefine good and evil in Genesis 3, they assert their rights over and above the 
rights of other humans. Now humans seek the resources and well-being of themselves and their 
own community to the disadvantage of others.
Genesis 3-11 offers us the fundamental biblical portrait of the human condition and a robust, 
multi-faceted portrait of injustice.
• Genesis 3: Humans have a choice when it comes to “knowing good and 
evil.” They choose to “take” this knowing for themselves, leading to gen -
der inequality (Gen. 3:16).
• Genesis 4: Cain does “good ” in his own eyes, leading to jealousy and 
murder, which spreads evil to more humans (such as Lemek, who kills for 
honor and revenge).
• Genesis 6: Humans corrupt the land through their violence.
• Genesis 11: Babylon is an example of the ways self-exaltation can quickly 
spiral out of control— the desire to rise to divine status.
3. God’s Covenant With Abraham
God made a covenant with Abraham, choosing his family as the vehicle through which he would 
form a nation that lived differently than the surrounding people groups and reflected his nature.
Genesis 18:17-19 
The LORD said, “Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do, since 
Abraham will surely become a great and mighty nation, and in him all the 
nations of the earth will be blessed? For I have chosen him, so that  he 
may command his children and his household after him to keep the way 
of the LORD by doing righteousness and justice , so that the Lord may 
bring upon Abraham what he has spoken about him. ”
In Genesis 12-50, the family of Abraham is chosen to become a counter-Babylon.
• Genesis 12: They are called to be a blessing to the nations.
• Genesis 15: They are to “do right by ” Yahweh through their faith.
• Genesis 18: They are to keep the way of the Lord by doing righteousness and justice.
• This is the first time the words “justice ” and “righteousness ” appear in the Bible.
• Righteousness (Hebrew tsedeq / tsedeqah ): doing right by some -
one; a standard of right relationship  between people. Justice 12“In order for an individual to be righteous, it means that of necessity he or she 
must exist and live in a manner which allows him or her to respond correctly in 
the values of the relationship (spouse, parent, judge, neighbor, etc.)... In es -
sence “righteousness ” is not simply an objective norm which is present within 
a society and which must be kept, but rather it is a concept which derives 
its meaning from the relationship in which it finds itself. Right judging, right 
governing, right worshiping, and generosity are all covenantal activities and so 
righteous, despite their diversity.” — Hemchand Gossai, Justice, Righteousness 
and the Social Critique of the Eighth-Century Israelite Prophets , 55-56
4. Israel Enslaved
Israel ends up enslaved in Egypt, and God performs justice for the oppressed. 
Exodus 6:5-6
I have heard the groaning of the sons of Israel, because the Egyptians are hold -
ing them in bondage, and I have remembered my covenant. Say, therefore, to the 
sons of Israel, “I am the LORD, and I will bring you out from under the burdens 
of the Egyptians, and I will deliver you from their bondage. I will also redeem you 
with an outstretched arm and with great acts of justice (Heb. shephatim). ”
5. The Law
God reveals the covenant laws to push Israel in the direction of greater justice 
and righteousness.  
Deuteronomy 4:5-8
See, I have taught you statutes and judgments  just as the LORD my God command -
ed me, that you should do thus in the land where you are entering to possess it. So 
keep and do them, for that is your wisdom  and your understanding in the sight of 
the peoples who will hear all these statutes and say, “Surely this great nation is a wise 
and understanding people. ” For … what great nation is there that has statutes and 
judgments  as righteous  as this whole law which I am setting before you today?
6. Israel Perpetuates Injustice
But Israel doesn ’t follow the covenant laws, and though they were once oppressed, they 
become the oppressors. The biblical prophets and poets accused the Israelites of per -
petrating injustice, and they pointed to a new leader who would come and embody true 
justice and righteousness.
Bruce Waltke, in an exhaustive study of tsedeq  and mishpat  in Proverbs and the Prophets, offers 
this summary. 
“The righteous are those who are willing to disadvantage themselves to 
the advantage of their community; the wicked are those who are willing to 
disadvantage the community to advantage themselves” — Bruce Waltke, 
The Book of Proverbs: Chapters 1-15 , 96.Justice 137. Jesus Fulfills the Just and Righteous Ideal 
Jesus came to fulfill all of these ideals, moving specifically toward the quartet of the vulnerable 
(the widow, the orphan, the immigrant, and the poor) and included them within his family. Jesus 
said God ’s Kingdom was first of all for the poor. 
Luke 14:12-14
When you give a luncheon or a dinner, do not invite your 
friends or your brothers or your relatives or rich neighbors, 
otherwise they may also invite you in return and that will 
be your repayment. But when you give a reception, invite 
the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind, and you will be 
blessed, since they do not have the means to repay you; 
for you will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous .Luke 11:42
But woe to you Pharisees! For you pay tithe of mint and 
rue and every kind of garden herb, and yet disregard 
justice and the love of God ; but these are the things you 
should have done without neglecting the others.
8. God’s Love and Justice in Jesus’ Death 
God’ s heart for love and justice, as developed throughout the Hebrew Bible, is perfectly  
fulfilled in Jesus ’ life, ministry, and sacrificial death. 
• God renders his just judgment  on corrupt Israel and humanity by a court 
sentence of guilty. 
• God judges as an act of love  by putting himself in the place of the guilty.
9. Followers of Jesus Pursue Justice and Righteousness
Followers of Jesus are judged by the love of God and found righteous through his generous 
grace. As a result of this grace, we should pursue biblical justice above all, which looks like put -
ting ourselves at a disadvantage for the well-being of the vulnerable and oppressed.
In the Apostle Paul’s vision of the body of Christ, the Church is a community that reenacts God’s 
righteousness. Righteousness motivated God to faithfully fulfill his promises to Abraham and 
David by sending the messianic King, who died on behalf of humanity’s injustice (Rom. 1-4). We 
see a concrete example of this in the letter to Philemon, where a slave and his master are now 
equals in the family of God.