Plot, Character, and Setting in Biblical Narrative 
Study Notes
Introduction 
Nearly half of the Bible is written in narrative. In order to understand the Bible more fully, 
it’s important to learn how to read this style of writing. In our How to Read the Bible series, 
we have four videos that focus specifically on reading biblical narrative. We look at four 
different aspects of narrative—plot, character, setting, and design patterns. These study 
notes will help you go deeper into the ideas introduced in three of our videos, Plot in 
Biblical Narrative, Character in Biblical Narrative, and Setting in Biblical Narrative.
Contents
Reading Biblical Narrative  2
Plot 3
Character  5
Setting  8Plot, Character, and Setting in Biblical Narrative  2
Reading Biblical Narrative
Biblical narratives make up nearly half of the Bible. In their basic form, narratives 
have characters in a setting going through a series of events, and their primary 
goal is to communicate a theological message through the medium of story.
When we read biblical narratives we are not watching security camera footage of these ancient 
events. We’re reading an artistic, literary representation of the story of Israel. The goal isn’t just to tell 
us about something that happened, but also to help us discern the meaning of these events. 
Let’s explore what we mean by artistic, literary representation using an example from 
art history. Take a look at this illustration of a pipe painted by Rene Magritte in 1929. It’s 
called “The Treachery of Images” and it includes the words “This is not a pipe.”  
In an interview about his painting, Magritte said, “The famous pipe. How people reproached me for it! 
And yet, could you stuff my pipe? No, it's just a representation, is it not? So if I had written on my picture 
'This is a pipe', I'd have been lying!” (Harry Torcyzner, Magritte: The True Art of Painting , 85).
Magritte was reacting against a renewal of “naive realism” in the art world, the idea 
that paintings ought to represent reality as it really is. Just like Magritte’s painting is not 
literally a pipe, so biblical narratives aren’t literally the events they represent. 
Rene Magritte used artistic tools and techniques like different sized brushes, various paint colors, shading, and 
proportions to render a representation of a pipe in his painting. Biblical authors also used basic tools to communicate 
the meaning of narrative events. The authors rendered narrative texts using the tools of plot, character, and setting. 
A photograph of a tree is a good example of the distinction between a text and 
the event depicted in it. A photograph is a representation of a tree, yet it does 
not have bark and leaves, nor is the sky behind the tree a real sky. To say that a 
photograph only represents the tree but is not actually the tree does not mean 
the tree never existed or that the photograph is inaccurate because it only shows 
one side of the tree. The same can be said of the biblical narrative texts. To say 
they represent events but are not the events themselves is simply to recognize 
a very obvious fact about biblical narratives: They are texts, which means we 
stand not before events, but representations of events through words.
John Sailhamer, Introduction to Old Testament Theology , 47. Plot, Character, and Setting in Biblical Narrative  3Plot
Plot is the arrangement of characters and events within a narrative to communicate a message. 
A basic plot starts with a character in a setting. Something new or unexpected happens, 
causing problems that lead to a conflict, which is then resolved, and the character is changed 
as a result. The plot is how those events are chosen and arranged by the author. 
Plot Embedding: Multi-Layered Biblical Storylines
One way biblical narrative uses plot is through plot embedding, or layers of storylines working together 
to tell the overall story of the Bible. We can break it down into three layers of storylines. 
Level one  is the single overall storyline to the Bible. Level two  is the multiple movements of that 
overall storyline. For example, the story of the whole Bible can be divided into four movements.
1. Creation to Babylon
2. The Covenant Story with Israel > Exile and Return
a. Abraham’s family and the covenant
b. Exodus and wilderness
c. Covenant at Mt. Sinai
d. Entry to the promised land
e. Failure in the land leads to exile
f. Return from exile and unrealized hopes
3. Jesus and the Kingdom
a. Kingdom mission in Galilee
b. Jesus’ enthronement in Jerusalem
4. People of the Kingdom to New Creation
a. Jerusalem, Judea and Samaria, to the ends of the earth
Level three  includes the hundreds of individual narratives that make up each of those larger 
movements. The individual narratives include stories like Noah and the ark, Jacob and Esau, Joseph 
and his coat of many colors, Samson the strong, Jesus and the blind man, or Paul in prison.     
 
All of these individual events are framed within a larger context that gives 
them a total meaning that transcends the individual events. The very first, and only really rigid, rule in literary theory is that texts must 
be read from beginning to end. The meaning of a word is not determined 
by its definition, but by its context. So also a single story’s meaning is only 
determined by the relationship of all its elements to the whole text.
Sean McEvenue, Interpretation and Bible , 171.Plot, Character, and Setting in Biblical Narrative  4Narrative Meaning
Narrative meaning is another element of plot. Essentially, the same events can take on different 
meanings depending on how you arrange the plot and whose point of view the story is told 
from. It’s also important to understand every event or scene in the context of its larger plotline. 
The same story can have a totally different message if we ignore the context. 
Take the story of Gideon laying out the fleece to discern God’s will. “If you will deliver Israel by my hand, 
look I will lay out a fleece of wool on the threshing floor. If there is dew on the fleece only, and it is dry on all 
the ground, then I will know that you will save Israel through me, as you have spoken”  (Judg. 6:36-37). 
By itself, the plot of this scene (Gideon needs to discern God’s will > he asks God for a sign > God provides the 
sign) could mean he’s being promoted as an example for us to follow. But in the larger context of Judges 6-8, this 
scene highlights Gideon’s distrust of God even though God has already provided a sign through the appearance of 
an angel and fire on the altar. This story is about Gideon “testing God” (Judg. 6:39), which is never a good idea. 
The point here is that the same story about Gideon and the fleece communicates the opposite 
meaning depending on our awareness of the larger plotlines. Context is important. 
Narrative meaning can also be found through plot sequence, or the use of conflict, 
climax, and resolution to convey a message. The same characters in the same conflict 
but with different resolutions of the climax can have a different message. 
Take this simple story about Billy. Billy is a growing, hungry boy (intro + conflict). He keeps sneaking 
cookies from the snack drawer and this behavior frustrates his mom (the climax). 
One way to resolve the story: Billy learns to sneak the cookies at night to avoid getting in trouble. The 
message of this version of the story is to be resourceful, adapt to solve problems, and sneak if you have 
to. The story could also resolve with Billy learning self-control from his mom and honoring her wishes. The 
message is now self-control is a great virtue and honoring authority figures is the way to get ahead in life.
Plot, Character, and Setting in Biblical Narrative  5Comedy and Tragedy: Types of Plot Structure
Plot structures can also be grouped by comedy and tragedy. Elements of these two genres come from ancient 
Greek philosopher Aristotle’s text Poetics, the earliest known work about dramatic and literary theory. 
Comedies are ascent stories.  The protagonist needs to climb and overcome challenges successfully in order to be 
transformed. Comedies prompt us to think about what’s valuable in the world, what’s worth the struggle, and what 
kind of people win. We want to be like the protagonist in a comedy. The biblical narrative of Joseph (Gen. 37-50) is 
a good example of a comedy structure. Joseph is abused by his brothers and sold into slavery. But because of his 
integrity, he rises from slavery to a place of influence in Egypt where he can later save his undeserving brothers. 
Tragedies are descent stories.  The protagonist is set up well, but due to character flaws or bad choices the 
protagonist self-destructs. We want to avoid being the protagonist in a tragedy. Tragedies make us think about 
what will ruin us, what’s worth the effort to avoid, and what kind of people lose. The story of Saul falls into this 
genre (1 Sam. 8-31). Saul is tall, handsome, and a go-getter, but he’s also prideful and thinks he knows better than 
everyone else. He is unable to recognize his own mistakes and he can’t take criticism. Eventually, his life falls apart.
Character
Biblical authors use characters as vehicles for their message primarily through 
showing rather than telling. Biblical characters are not meant to be people 
we try to emulate. In fact, they often represent how not to act! But the biblical 
authors use them to communicate the morals and ethics of a godly life.  
Most of an author’s view of the world and the values they want to communicate 
are embodied in the narrative and expressed through the characters. Not 
only do characters serve as a narrator’s mouthpiece, but also what is and 
is not related about them, which of their personality traits are emphasized 
and which are not, these all reveal the ethical values and moral norms 
within the narrative. The decisions that characters are called upon to make 
when confronted with moral choices, and the results of their decisions 
provide indisputable evidence of a narrative’s ethical dimension.
Shimon Bar-Efrat, The Art of Biblical Narrative , 47.
The Greek storytelling tendency of loading the story with details is one that 
modern literary practice has by and large adopted and developed. Precisely 
for that reason we have to adjust our habits as readers in order to bring an 
adequate attentiveness to the rather different narrative maneuvers characteristic 
of the Hebrew Bible. The underlying biblical conception of people’s character 
is that they’re unpredictable, constantly emerging from and slipping back into 
ambiguity. Thus, biblical narrative style is marked by the art of reticence.
Robert Alter,  The Art of Biblical Narrative,  129. Plot, Character, and Setting in Biblical Narrative  6Direct Characterization (Telling)
Narrators rarely make comments in biblical narrative, and when they do, it’s with small details or brief phrases. 
1. Physical appearance: Joseph’s looks, Saul’s stature, Esau’s hair, but only when relevant to the narrative.
2. Moral evaluation of a character’s actions: did evil, did good, righteous, wise, foolish, (Nabal, 1 Sam. 25:25).
3. Favoritism in the story of Isaac and Rebecca.
Direct characterization is extremely rare in the Bible. Adele Berlin, Poetics and Interpretation 
of Biblical Narrative,  uses the illustration of two types of painting. She compares realism 
(modern, Western narrative) with impressionism or pointillism (biblical narrative).
With small strokes or tiny dots (pointillism), biblical authors give us the trace of a 
character but we have to fill in the rest based on the little we know. 
Esau is hairy, and in the story this description shows that he is outdoorsy, primitive, and behaves like an 
animal. Eli is old and blind, and this tells us he is both literally and relationally blind, because he ignores 
the rebellion of his sons. Saul is tall and David is short, and this detail speaks to the contrast of their 
characters. Saul imposes himself from above, while David humbly allows God to exalt him from below.  
 
Indirect Characterization (Showing)
Names
The names of characters often indicate their role in the story. 
For example, Saul means “the one asked for.” Abram/Abraham means “exalted father/father of a 
multitude.” Israel means “struggles with God.” Adam means “humanity.” Elijah means “Yaweh is my 
god.” The names of Naomi's two sons, Mahlon and Kilion, means “sicko" and "done-for.” 
Actions
In the article, “Character in the Boundaries of Biblical Narrative,” J.M. McCracken says, “Biblical narrators prefer 
to show people’s character rather than tell us an evaluation of their traits. Characters are something the biblical 
authors tend to speak with  rather than about.” Instead of moralizing about a character’s decisions, biblical narrators 
simply show you the decisions and consequences of that character’s decisions and allow you to ponder the 
significance. For example, Moses kills an Egyptian. Why? Justice? An anger problem? Is his behavior good or bad?[In impressionist art,] The suggestion of a thing may be more convincing than a 
detailed portrayal. This is due to the tendency of our brains to project meaning 
onto images in order to complete our expectations. We see what we expect to 
see, and the surrounding information guides our perception. This is why we fill in a 
partially drawn figure to conform to our expectations, and in some cases too much 
information may destroy the image. The trick, from the artists’ point of view, is how 
much detail to include and how much to omit. This is a good corrective for those 
who wish biblical stories provided more concrete details, but this is precisely its 
narrative technique. The gaps left in all biblical narratives are intentional, so that 
with a few deft strokes the biblical author engages the imagination of the reader to 
construct a picture that is more “real” than if he had filled in David or Abraham or 
Joseph’s portrait with more detail. Minimal representation can give maximal illusion.
Adele Berlin, Poetics and Interpretation of Biblical Narrative.  Plot, Character, and Setting in Biblical Narrative  7Speech
Often, the narrative pauses and a key character will offer a long speech (Josh. 24; Samuel in 1 Sam. 8 
or 12; Solomon in 1 Kgs. 8) or sing a song (Jacob, Gen. 49; Moses, Exod. 15; Hannah, 1 Sam. 2).
Sometimes, speech reveals character. Take Abraham speaking to his servants in Genesis 22. “The boy and I will go to 
the mountain and we will worship and we will return.” Is Abraham full of faith, or is he selling a line to avoid suspicion?
The minimalist policy and narrative economics are very intentional. It forces 
you, the reader, to participate in the making of meaning.
God as a Character
God is the only character who continues through every movement of the biblical narrative 
from beginning to end. God’s presence in biblical narrative tells us that the fundamental 
intent of these stories is to reveal God’s character, identity, and purpose in history.
Character:  God wants good for people, and he wants to share creation with them (Gen. 
1-2). God brings justice on human evil, and he also forgives and restores. 
Identity:  The author of the universe is the God revealed through the family of 
Abraham and Israel and ultimately through Jesus of Nazareth.
Purpose: God’s purpose is to rescue his creation from evil so it can be shared in love for eternity. 
God has dual roles in biblical narratives. 
The first role is that of present/interventionist God. Genesis 1-11 depicts God as a present, direct character walking and 
talking with people. He also appears or intervenes in wilderness stories. For example, the angel of the LORD comes 
to Hagar, Abraham’s pregnant slave, in the wilderness (Gen. 16:7-16). Moses encounters God in the burning bush and 
God calls him to bring the Israelites out of Egypt (Exod. 3-4, 24-31). In Numbers, God is present with the people as a 
pillar of cloud in the Israelite camp, and he speaks directly to Moses as he leads the people through the wilderness Once you realizes the Bible’s anti-didactic style is a narrative policy, you gain insight into the role 
of the aesthetic subtlety of these stories. They almost always shun extended commentary or 
explanation, let a one homiletics [= sermoning, moralizing]. These authors intentionally leave gaps 
for the reader to puzzle over—discontinuities, indeterminacies, non-sequiturs, unexplained motives—
and they’re fully aware of the disorienting effect this has on readers as they try to draw lessons from 
the past. Biblical narrators conceal the meaning of their stories to an extent seldom equaled by any 
other literature in history. This style was not inherited by Israel’s neighboring cultures, rather it was 
invented and elaborated in the Israelite tradition of narrative and it’s nothing less than deliberate. 
In day to day life, knowledge and information and the ability to understand the meaning of events 
is power. But in reading the Bible, we’re constantly puzzling over the gaps in the stories [why 
did Moses do that? why did God do that?], and this is strategic: our puzzlement is an imitation 
of our real position in life. It exposes our ignorance about the meaning of history or our lives. 
Biblical stories imitate our real-life conditions of inference, as we too are daily surrounded by 
ambiguities, baffled and misled by appearances, reduced to piecing fragments together by 
trial and error of interpretation, and we’re often left in the dark about the meaning of our lives 
to the very end. The scarcity of commentary by the biblical narrators forces us to constantly 
evaluate the character’s motives and the meaning of the plot as we look for clues. It is only by 
sustained effort that the reader of biblical narratives can attain to the point of view that God 
has possessed all along. Making sense of biblical stories is to gain a sense of being human.
Meir Sternberg, T he Poetics of Biblical Narrative - Ideological 
Literature and the Drama of Reading , 42, 47.Plot, Character, and Setting in Biblical Narrative  8to the promised land (Num. 11-21). The prophet Elijah meets and speaks with God in the wilderness (1 Kgs. 19:9-21).
The second role is that of absent/supervisory God. In stories like Genesis 37-50, or in stories 
about King David, Esther, or Ruth, God is depicted as indirect, sporadically known, and hard 
to perceive. He supervises events from behind the scenes. The drama of these stories is 
about how the characters will relate to God when they don’t know what’s going on.  
 
 
 
 
Setting
The action of every story takes place somewhere, and that place is called the setting. 
Biblical authors use the setting as a tool in biblical narratives to evoke memories and 
emotions and to generate expectations about what could happen in the story. Physical 
places and locations serve as settings, but time also serves as a type of setting. 
Place 
As the biblical story develops, places and situations begin to take on a symbolic or meaningful significance based on 
what has happened there. Think about common settings in modern Western films and how each location has a genre 
associated with it like action movies set in New York, romances set in Paris, or westerns set in dusty ghost towns.  
In the Bible, “the east” represents the human spiral of sin and selfishness as people moved from the 
garden of Eden to Babylon. Adam and Eve are banished “to the east” in Genesis 3. Adam’s son Cain 
is banished “to the East” in Genesis 4, and people move “to the east” to build the city of Babylon in 
Genesis 11:1-2. Eventually, Babylon becomes a superpower in the story that comes back to take over the 
family of Abraham when the Israelite people are exiled to the east in Babylon (2 Chron. 36:15-20).
Other places that hold significance in the overall story of the Bible include Egypt, Moab, the wilderness, Bethlehem, 
and Jerusalem. These settings become loaded with more and more meaning as the biblical story develops over time. 
Time 
Time, or how long things take, also serves as a type of setting in biblical narrative. You can tell which events 
are most meaningful to the author’s message by what gets the most air time. In the Gospel of Mark, chapters 
1-10 cover some three years of Jesus’ life and ministry, while chapters 11-16 cover seven days in Jerusalem. 
Thirty percent of the story focuses on those seven days, and this emphasizes the importance of those days. 
The number 40 is a meaningful time period in biblical narrative that represents a period of waiting and testing. Noah 
spends 40 days and nights on the ark, Moses spends 40 days on the top of Mount Sinai, and the Israelites wander 
in the desert for 40 years (Num. 14:34) as punishment for rebelling after the Israelite spies investigate the promised 
land for 40 days (Num. 13). And because we have become familiar with this idea of 40 days as a time of patience 
and testing, when Jesus is tested in the desert for 40 days and overcomes the test, he reverses our expectations. The more God is depicted as a present character, commanding or testing, 
punishing or forgiving, the more the human characters are depicted in a flat 
manner, as singular types such as rebellious, obedient, or sinful. But when 
God is portrayed as absent or behind the scenes, there is more narrative 
space for multi-faceted human characters and their complex motives. 
Yairah Amit, Reading Biblical Narratives: Literary 
Criticism and the Hebrew Bible , 84.