Visual Commentary: Psalm 1481
Visual Commentary: Psalm 148 
Study Notes
Psalm 148 is a poem in the final section of the book of Psalms. It’s a call for all of the 
cosmos, every part of creation, to praise Yahweh. And it points to one of the main 
focuses of the book of Psalms and the Hebrew Bible as whole—God’s promise to deliver 
his people from oppression, to “raise up a horn” for Israel. We look at this phrase and 
dig deeper into this brilliant work of poetry in our latest video, Visual Commentary: 
Psalm 148. Go deeper into the ideas from this video with these study notes.
Contents
Literary Design of Psalm 148  2
Praise For the Lifted Horn  3
The Story of the Psalms  3
The Messiah King of Psalms 1-2
The Story of the Fall: Books 1-3
Hope in Restoration: Books 4-5
Structure of the Final Book
The Structure of Psalm 148  4
The Skies: Verses 1-6
The Land: Verses 7-14
Conclusion  8Visual Commentary: Psalm 1482
Literary Design of Psalm 148
This psalm begins and ends with the phrase “Praise Yah.” This design gives 
us an idea of the purpose of this poem—it’s a praise song. And the rest of 
the poem points to why we should all join in the praise of Yahweh. 
1Praise Yah.
Praise Yahweh from the skies;  praise him in the heights.
2Praise him, all his messengers; praise him all his hosts.  
3Praise him, sun and moon; praise him stars of light.
4Praise him, skies of skies, and the waters that are above the skies.
5Let them praise the name of Yahweh,   
for he commanded and they were created,  
6and he established them forever and ever;  
a decree he gave and it will not pass.
7Praise Yahweh from the land,  
sea monsters and deep,  
8fire and hail, snow and smoke,  
stormy wind, doing his word.
9Mountains and all hills, fruit trees and all cedars,
10wild animals and all cattle, creeping things and winged birds.  
11Kings of the land and all peoples, princes and all the judges of the land,  
12young men and also young women, elders with children.
13Let them praise the name of Yahweh,  
For exalted is his name alone, his majesty above the land and the skies.  
14He has lifted up the horn of his people,  
the praise of all his loyal ones, of Israel, a people near to him.
Praise Yah.Visual Commentary: Psalm 1483
Praise For the Lifted Horn
The psalms are arranged to tell a story. And it’s a story that ends with an invitation for all 
creation to praise Yahweh, the God of Israel. This is the theme of Psalm 148. It’s in the center 
of the concluding section of Psalms. And in this poem, all creation is called to praise Yahweh 
because of his work of creation, and because he has raised up the horn  of his people. 
But what does this mean, “to raise up the horn of his people”?
The horn is really good news for the people of Israel, and it’s the perfect conclusion to the story of the 
Psalms. Throughout Scripture, a raised horn is an image of a bull’s horn lifted in victory after a battle. It’s 
used throughout the Bible to talk about how God will bring victory to the afflicted and oppressed.
In the story of the Psalms, this victory comes through a messianic King, who we meet 
in the introduction. Let’s do a quick overview of the story of the Psalms.
The Story of the Psalms
The Messiah King of Psalms 1-2
The Psalms begin with a two-part introduction (Psalms 1-2). Psalm 1 describes the blessing that those who 
follow Yahweh will experience. They’ll live at peace and flourish, just like in the garden story of Genesis 1-2.
Psalm 2 reveals how this ideal will come about—through God raising up his messianic King. This King will follow God 
as a son, and he’ll be victorious over the powerful rulers that stand up against Yahweh and oppress his people. 
This description refers back to a promise God made to King David, that through 
his line, God’s Kingdom would be established (2 Samuel 7). 
The Story of the Fall: Books 1-3
The story of the Psalms traces the establishment, fall, and re-establishment of the kingdom of Israel.
In the first section of the Psalter, called Book 1, God rescues David from his affliction and raises him up as king. But 
then, in Books 2-3, the kingdom falls to enemy nations and the people are left without a king and without a home.
There’s a sharp contrast between the ideal depicted in the introduction of the Psalms and 
the reality of human suffering and oppression. And so the king and the people sing lament 
songs. They cry out for God to rescue them. And they also sing songs of hope, asking God 
to fulfill his promises to David and send his Messiah to establish his Kingdom. 
Hope in Restoration: Books 4-5
This hope is what Books 4 and 5 are all about. The people renew their trust in Yahweh as the true 
King (Book 4) who will bring about his Kingdom through a future messianic King (Book 5). 
These books are full of psalms of praise for Yahweh and this ideal Kingdom. The entire story of the Psalms 
concludes with a grand finale of praise called the “final hallel,” or final praise (Psalms 146-150). Visual Commentary: Psalm 1484Structure of the Final Book
The final hallel is made up of five psalms (Psalms 146-150), which each begin and end with the same word “hallelu-
Yah.” This is Hebrew for “praise Yah,” short for “Yahweh.” Right in the middle, at the apex of this final hallel, is Psalm 148. 
The Structure of Psalm 148
Psalm 148 is a song calling all creation to praise Yahweh, as it echoes back to the Genesis 1 story.
It begins and ends with “hallelu-Yah,” and then it’s broken up into two parts focusing 
on the skies (first half, vv. 1-6) and on the land (second half, vv. 7-14). 
1Praise Yah.
Praise YHWH from the skies...
7Praise YHWH from the land...
Praise Yah.
The Skies: Verses 1-6
The first half of the poem calls all the skies to praise Yahweh. Both spaces and their 
inhabitants are mentioned, recalling days one, two, and four of the Genesis story. 
Genesis 1 Structure
Spaces Inhabitants
Day 1: Light Day 4: Sun, moon, and stars
Day 2: Skies and waters above Day 5
Day 3 Day 6
On day two, the skies and the waters above the skies are called to praise.
“His angels,” or “his hosts,” which are also called the sun, moon, and 
stars of light, are called to praise on days one and four.Visual Commentary: Psalm 14851Praise Yah.
Praise Yahweh from the  skies
...heights
2...angels
...hosts
3...sun and moon
...stars  and light
4...skies of skies
...waters above the skies
Then comes the reason for praise.
Yahweh is the ruling creator—the King to be praised even by the highest skies.
1Praise Yah.
Praise Yahweh from the skies.
5Let them praise the name of Yahweh,
for he commanded and they were created, 
6and he established them forever and ever;
a decree he gave and it will not pass.Let them praise the name of Yahweh,  
for he commanded and they were created,  
and he established them forever and ever;  
a decree he gave and it will not pass.Visual Commentary: Psalm 1486The Land: Verses 7-14
The second half of the psalm then calls all from the land to praise Yahweh. This section mirrors the call 
for those from the skies to praise by echoing the opening phrase: “Praise Yahweh from the land.”
1Praise Yah.
Praise YHWH from the skies...
7Praise YHWH from the land...
Praise Yah.
Here, the outer limits of the earthly realm are first called to praise. These are the forces of de-creation and chaos: 
the sea monsters, the deep, fire and hail, snow and smoke, stormy wind. The point is that Yahweh is King over it all.
Then, we move in closer to the land—to the hills and the trees, the spaces of the land. And 
then we zoom in even closer to the land’s inhabitants , the animals and humans. 
What stands out here is the description of the humans. It takes up the most space and is inclusive of everyone.
7Praise Yahweh from the land ,
Chaos...
Land...
Animals...
11Kings of the land and all peoples, 
princes and all the judges of the land,
12Young men and also young 
women, elders with children.
Just as the call for the skies to praise Yahweh echoed days one, two, and four of creation, so 
now the call for the land to praise echoes days three, five, and six with its mention of the land 
and the trees (day three), fish and birds (day five), and animals and humans (day six).
Spaces Inhabitants
Day 1: Light Day 4: Sun, moon, and stars
Day 2: Skies and waters above Day 5: Fish and birds
Day 3: Land and trees Day 6: Animals and humans
 Visual Commentary: Psalm 14877Praise Yahweh from the land,
sea monsters and deep, 
8fire and hail, snow and smoke,
stormy wind, doing his word,
9mountains and all hills, fruit trees and all cedars,
10wild animals and all cattle, creeping things and winged birds,
11kings of the land and all peoples, princes and all the judges of the land,
12young men and also young women, elders with children.
All that Yahweh has created is invited to praise him. The reason for praise in the second  
half of the song begins like the first, with praise for Yahweh, the exalted creator (v. 17):
This is a summary of the whole poem so far—he is the King over all. This is a reminder to Israel that  
even in their distress and suffering, Yahweh is still King. But there’s more. Because he is the true King,  
he will act on behalf of the oppressed. This is where the horn comes in.
1Praise Yah.
Praise Yahweh from the skies;
5let them praise the name of Yahweh.
7Praise Yahweh from the land;
13let them praise the name of Yahweh,
for exalted is his name alone, his majesty above the land and the skies.
14He has lifted up the horn of his people,
the praise of all his loyal ones, of Israel, a people near to him.
Praise Yah.Exalted is his name alone  
his majesty, above the land and the skies.
He has lifted up the horn of his people,  
the praise of all his loyal ones, of Israel, a people near to him.Visual Commentary: Psalm 1488Conclusion
Remember earlier how we were talking about the “raised horn” symbolizing victory for the 
afflicted? Psalm 148 is saying that Yahweh will bring victory to his people. But how?
We have to look at this psalm in the context of the whole Hebrew Bible and the story of 
the Psalms. Psalm 148 is the culmination of the whole storyline of the Psalms. 
It’s a story that begins with the hope of an ideal Davidic king to come, and it then traces the rise and fall of the Davidic 
kingdom. The story of the Psalms ends with renewed hope in God as King and trust that he will fulfill his promises. 
Psalm 148 confirms that God will raise up his Messiah to bring victory for the oppressed: “He will raise the horn 
of his people.” And all creation will praise Yahweh, from the highest of the skies to the lowest of the Earth. 