Reading the Bible as a Unified Story
The Bible is a really large book made up of the Old and New 
Testaments, which themselves are made up of many books. 
There’s a lot of ancient history, poetry, and letters written 
across the span of fifteen hundred years. On top of that, 
there’s a cast of hundreds of people over this period of time. 
Who can keep it all straight?
It can be easy to get lost, not only because it’s an ancient text, 
but also because the book is large and complex. 
Despite this variety and diversity, the Bible shows a remarkable 
unity. The most dominant type of literature in the Bible is 
narrative. It opens with, “In the beginning,” and the second to 
last paragraph concludes with, “and they reigned forever and 
ever.” Narrative composes five hundred and two chapters, or 
forty-three percent of the text. That’s nearly half the Bible! On 
the other hand, poetry makes up thirty-three percent of the 
Bible (three hundred eighty-seven chapters).
Although the Bible is a diverse set of literature and may appear 
fragmented at first, it ultimately presents itself as a unified 
epic narrative that leads to Jesus. There is one main plotline 
weaving the different books and stories together.
Once you grasp this core storyline and how all the books fit 
together, you can pick the Bible up at any point, and you’ll 
know right where you are and what’s going on.
HOW TO READ THE BIBLE: EPISODE 2
The Story of the Bible
__________________________________________________
STUDY NOTES  
Learn more and 
watch our videos at 
thebibleproject.com
THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 2  HOW TO READ THE BIBLE 2
How the Story Works
Creation and the Royal task
God confronts chaos and out of it creates a wonderful, 
ordered world full of beauty and potential. He then appoints 
humans to oversee this world and multiply and create new 
communities. This opening story offers an ideal vision of the 
vocation of humans. Humans are to take this good world and 
develop all of its potential while living in harmony with God 
and each other. 
Rebellion and the Fallout 
As the humans go about this task they’ve been given, they’re 
faced with choices about what is good and evil. Will they trust 
God’s wisdom, or will they seize autonomy and define good 
and evil for themselves? 
Here a dark, mysterious character enters the story. It 
represents evil at its source, and it entices the humans to 
doubt God’s generosity and rebel. This leads to disaster; 
humanity’s relationship with God is fractured, and their 
relationships with themselves, their families, and the earth 
breakdown. This all leads to the rise of two cities (Enoch and 
Babylon) where pride and violence reign.1
2 Creation and the Royal Task
Genesis 1 - 2OLD TESTAMENT
Rebellion and the Fallout
Genesis 3 - 11
God’s Covenant with Israel
Genesis 12 - 50, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Judges, 
Ruth, 1 and 2 Samuel, 1 and 2 Kings, 1 and 2 Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah, 
Esther, Job, Psalm, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Song of Solomon, Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, Lamentations, Ezekiel, Daniel, Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, 
Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi
Jesus and the Kingdom of God
Matthew, Mark, Luke, JohnNEW TESTAMENT
The Spreading of Kingdom People
Acts, Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, 
Colossians, 1 and 2 Thessalonians, 1 and 2 Timothy, Titus, Philemon, 
Hebrews, James, 1 & 2 Peter, 1, 2, & 3 John, Jude
The Return of the King
RevelationTHE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 3  HOW TO READ THE BIBLE 2God’s Covenant with Israel
The tension between the just and generous creator God and 
the rebellious nations who have given into evil develops the 
plot conflict that drives the storyline of the entire Bible. 
God’s response sets in motion a plan to restore divine blessing 
to the whole world. He will do this through one family chosen 
from among the nations, the people of Abraham, who later 
become Israel. 
The story of God and Israel is the first main subplot of the 
Biblical story. It has three main movements:
God Chooses Israel to Bless the Nations
God makes a covenant promise to Abraham’s 
family to bring them into a land where 
they’ll become a nation that brings God’s 
blessing to the world. The family grows, but 
they become enslaved in Egypt. As a nation, 
Egypt embodies all that’s gone wrong with 
humanity: idolatry, injustice, and giving into 
evil. 
God raises up Moses and defeats Egypt’s evil, 
rescuing his people and bringing them to 
Mount Sinai. There he enters into a covenant 
partnership with Israel. Furthermore, he will 
personally live among them. They are invited 
to obey the terms of the covenant which 
start with the ten commandments, followed 
by hundreds more. By being faithful to these 
commands, they will become God’s priestly 
representatives to the nations. 
Israel’s Royal Failure
Israel enters the promised land, and they 
blow it–big time. They begin worshiping the 
gods of the nations around them, leading 
to corruption and injustice. Even their best 
kings, like David or Solomon, fail miserably. 
Eventually the leaders of Israel run the nation 
into the ground. Then the tribes of Israel are 
conquered by the superpower, Babylon. Most 
of the Israelites are then dragged into exile in 
Babylon. Now we see two big conflicts in the 
story. All of the nations have continued with 
their rebellion, ruining God’s good world. 
Even God’s own chosen people are doing the 
same! 
Israel’s Exile and the Prophetic Hope
Despite Israel’s sin, all wasn’t lost. Among 
Israel was a vocal minority called the 
prophets. They had previously warned of 
Israel’s downfall, but they also made it clear 
that it wasn’t the end of the story. God had 
promised to restore divine blessing to the Movement One:
Genesis 12- 
Deuteronomy
Movement Two:
Joshua, 
Judges,
1 & 2 Samuel,
1 & 2 Kings
Movement Three:
Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, 
Ezekiel, 
Hosea - Malachi3 THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 4  HOW TO READ THE BIBLE 2
world through this family, and even Israel’s 
rebellion wouldn’t stop him.
Their hope was that after the exile God would 
return to live among his people once again 
and a great leader would come and lead 
Israel in faithfulness to their God. Moreover, 
it would be through this very leader that God 
would rescue the world. 
So the storyline of the Old Testament comes to a close, but 
with all of these tensions unresolved. We are left with a truly 
epic story waiting for the final ending. 
Jesus and the Kingdom of God
Enter Jesus of Nazareth who is sometimes called Immanuel, 
meaning God with us. The four Gospels in the New Testament 
present him as the resolution to all of the conflict of the Old 
Testament. They claimed he was the very love of God become 
human and the embodiment of divine mercy. They claimed 
Jesus was the kind of human we were all made to be, but 
perpetually fail to be. Furthermore, they claimed Jesus was 
the faithful Israelite who would fulfill God’s promise to return 
divine blessing to all of the nations through Abraham. 
Here’s how he’d do it. Humanity and Israel’s embrace of evil 
had created a world of violence and death, but Jesus was a 
man of compassionate power. He proclaimed that he was 
bringing God’s kingdom back over the earth and he would 
confront the tragic effects of evil. But Jesus’ plan to defeat 
humanity’s evil and sin was to let it defeat him. After dying for 
the sins of the world, his resurrection from death sealed his 
victory over all of our evil and death. He now offers up his own 
righteous life as a gift to those who would follow him. 4THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 5  HOW TO READ THE BIBLE 2
The Spreading People of the Kingdom
After his resurrection, Jesus’ followers experienced the 
power of the Holy Spirit indwelling them with his presence 
in Jerusalem. Jesus appeared in the flesh many more times, 
sending his followers out as witnesses to share the incredible 
news of what he had done for Israel and all humanity. This 
Jesus movement became a multi-ethnic international 
movement that flourished especially among the poor. It was 
made up of small communities of mutual love and generosity 
called “churches.” People would gather to celebrate their 
new way of life as redeemed humans enjoying an intimate 
covenant with God. They would eat together and worship 
Jesus while challenging each other to abide by his teachings. 
A large portion of the New Testament is made up of letters 
from Jesus’ appointed leaders called “apostles.” Written 
to all kinds of different churches, these letters showed the 
recipients what it meant to participate in Jesus’ kingdom in 
the first century world. Moreover, the entire New Testament 
presents Jesus as the way forward for humanity itself. In Jesus, 
God’s brand new world is inaugurated. His followers continue 
to look to the day when he will return to finish what he 
started: conquering evil completely while fully establishing his 
kingdom on earth with us forever.
The Return of the King
All disciples of Jesus, the apostles, and Jesus himself have set 
their future hope in God’s covenant promises to completely 
redeem our world and set all things right. This hope is focused 
on the return of Jesus to consummate the kingdom he 
inaugurated through his life, death, and resurrection. On that 
day, he will return to fully confront and deal with evil in all 
of its manifestations, removing it completely from his good 
world. He will make all things new, and people from all nations 
who submit to his love and justice will be invited into this new 
creation. It is here, and at an unfathomable degree, that the 
great human vocation of ruling as caretakers in the presence 
and goodness of God will be carried forward.65THE BIBLE PROJECT STUDY NOTES
 PAGE 6  HOW TO READ THE BIBLE 2Discussion Questions
1 From the Tower of Babel story through the rest of the 
Old Testament, what specific consequences manifested 
themselves from choices that individuals and whole groups 
of people made in defining good and evil on their own terms 
rather than on God’s?
2 Why is it so tempting to eat the “forbidden fruit” and define 
good and evil on our own terms?
3 Review the context of Exodus 19:13b. Might God be calling 
all of Israel up the mountain into his presence here? If so, 
does Israel remain “distant” by choosing to make Moses an 
intermediary in Exodus 20:18-20? Correspond this thought 
experiment with Israel’s desire to have a human king like their 
neighboring nations. Furthermore, how might this “distance” 
from God inform the apostle Paul’s view of the law? 
4 Why do you suppose it took so many generations for Jesus, 
the promised messiah, to arrive?
5 How does God/Jesus’ definition of good, as serving others 
and practicing self-sacrificial love, ultimately triumph over the 
evil we often choose for ourselves? Where else can we see 
evidence of this triumph at work in the world? 
6 In the end, when all wrongs are made right, all evil is 
eradicated, heaven and earth unite, and humanity rules 
together with God, will it be because humanity finally chooses 
God’s definition, or because God overwhelms us with so much 
goodness that we have little choice in the matter? What are 
some other possible scenarios? 
FURTHER READING:
The Drama of Scripture: Finding 
Our Place in the Biblical Story
Craig Bartholomew & Michael Goheen
A Walk through the Bible
Lesslie Newbigin
Dominion and Dynasty: A Biblical 
Theology of the Hebrew Bible
Stephen Dempster
The King in His Beauty: A Biblical Theology 
of the Old and New Testaments
Thomas Schreiner